                                                                                                                                                                                           2026-2-19



                                         World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies
                                         Seonghyeon Ye†           Yunhao Ge*           Kaiyuan Zheng*           Shenyuan Gao*               Sihyun Yu*     George Kurian*
                                         Suneel Indupuru*           You Liang Tan*          Chuning Zhu           Jiannan Xiang             Ayaan Malik       Kyungmin Lee
                                         William Liang         Nadun Ranawaka             Jiasheng Gu           Yinzhen Xu            Guanzhi Wang        Fengyuan Hu
                                         Avnish Narayan          Johan Bjorck           Jing Wang        Gwanghyun Kim                 Dantong Niu       Ruijie Zheng           Yuqi Xie
                                         Jimmy Wu        Qi Wang           Ryan Julian        Danfei Xu         Yilun Du          Yevgen Chebotar         Scott Reed           Jan Kautz
                                                    †                           †                 †
                                         Yuke Zhu        Linxi “Jim” Fan              Joel Jang
                                         NVIDIA
                                         †
                                           Project Leads * Core Contributors
                                         https://dreamzero0.github.io
arXiv:2602.15922v1 [cs.RO] 17 Feb 2026




                                                                                          Diverse, Non-repetitive Pretraining Data



                                                              Bi-manual Mobile Manipulation                                                       Single-Arm Manipulation




                                                                                               Task Diversity         > Repetition
                                                                                                      DreamZero
                                                                                                       Videos    Language Proprio

                                              Fruit Packing           Table Bussing                                                                      Bimanual Arm                 Human
                                                                                                        World Action Model



                                                                                                      Future Videos    Continuous actions
                                            Generalization after Post-training                                                                       Task Transfer via X-Embodiments

                                                                     Zero-shot Generalization to 
                                                         Few-shot Adaptation to 

                                                                 Unseen Tasks in Unseen Environments                                                         New Embodiment



                                                          Untie the box                                          Fan the burger                          Pick up the teddy      Put orange in pumpkin
                                                                                                                                                               bear




                                                        Press elevator button                           Depress the lever on the toaster             Put noodle in paper bag     Put banana in shelf
                                                                                                                                                             With only 30 minutes of play data


                                         Figure 1: Overview. By jointly predicting video and action, World Action Models (WAMs) inherit world physics
                                         priors that enable 1) effective learning from diverse, non-repetitive data, 2) open-world generalization, 3)
                                         cross-embodiment learning from video-only data, and 4) few-shot adaptation to new robots.




                                          © 2026 NVIDIA. All rights reserved.
                                      World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



Abstract
State-of-the-art Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models excel at semantic generalization but struggle
to generalize to unseen physical motions in novel environments. We introduce DreamZero, a World
Action Model (WAM) built upon a pretrained video diffusion backbone. Unlike VLAs, WAMs learn physical
dynamics by predicting future world states and actions, using video as a dense representation of how
the world evolves. By jointly modeling video and action, DreamZero learns diverse skills effectively
from heterogeneous robot data without relying on repetitive demonstrations. This results in over 2×
improvement in generalization to new tasks and environments compared to state-of-the-art VLAs in real-
robot experiments. Crucially, through model and system optimizations, we enable a 14B autoregressive
video diffusion model to perform real-time closed-loop control at 7Hz. Finally, we demonstrate two
forms of cross-embodiment transfer: video-only demonstrations from other robots or humans yield a
relative improvement of over 42% on unseen task performance with just 10–20 minutes of data. More
surprisingly, DreamZero enables few-shot embodiment adaptation, transferring to a new embodiment
with only 30 minutes of play data while retaining zero-shot generalization.


1. Introduction
Recent robotic foundation models, termed Vision-Language Action models (VLAs), extend pretrained Vision-
Language Models (VLMs) to predict motor actions (Bjorck et al., 2025; Black et al., 2024; Brohan et al., 2023;
Gemini Robotics Team, 2025; Kim et al., 2024). While VLAs successfully inherit linguistic priors to generalize
across diverse language instructions, especially manipulating diverse objects (Brohan et al., 2023), their
generalization to novel environments and, more critically, to new motions or skills remains limited (Guruprasad
et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025). For example, VLAs can successfully execute “move coke can to Taylor Swift”
(Brohan et al., 2023) by leveraging the web knowledge acquired during VLM pretraining to identify the target
location, and connecting it to the learned move skill from the robot data. However, they fail at a task like
“untie the shoelace” if that specific skill was not present in the robot training data. Although VLM priors encode
what to do at a semantic level, they lack representations of how actions should be executed with precise spatial
awareness, aligned with geometry, dynamics, and motor control (Chen et al., 2024; Feng et al., 2025). As a
result, VLAs often struggle to adapt to new environments or generalize to novel tasks beyond the distribution
of expert demonstrations, without explicitly collecting large-scale task- and environment-specific action data.

In this paper, we present DreamZero, a 14B robot foundation model built upon a pretrained image-to-
video diffusion backbone (Team Wan, 2025). We term this architecture a World Action Model (WAM)—a
foundation model designed to predict both actions and visual future states in an aligned manner. Initialized
from video diffusion models trained on web-scale video data, WAMs leverage rich spatiotemporal priors to jointly
generate future frames and actions conditioned on language instructions and observations. This shifts action
learning from dense state–action imitation to inverse dynamics—aligning motor commands with predicted
visual futures. Consequently, we observe that this enables (1) effective learning from robot data that are
heterogeneous trajectories collected during the execution of useful behaviors in real-world settings, rather
than relying solely on carefully repeated demonstrations (2) zero-shot generalization to new tasks in new
environments, and (3) efficient cross-embodiment transfer.

This approach yields three core advancements that distinguish DreamZero from prior work, including other
WAMs (Kim et al., 2026; Liang et al., 2025; Pai et al., 2025). First, DreamZero unlocks new generalization
capabilities beyond traditional VLAs and previous WAMs—across environments, across tasks, and across
embodiments (Figure 2 and Figure 3). Compared to the state-of-the-art pretrained VLAs, we observe more
than a 2× improvement in average task progress on environment and task generalization benchmarks. Second,
DreamZero demonstrates that generalist policies can be learned effectively from diverse, heterogeneous
data, breaking away from the conventional wisdom that generalist robot policies require multiple repeated


                                                                                                                2
                                       World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies


                            Hit the Cymbal                                      Fry vegetables in pan with spatula


  Real-world
  Execution




  Generated




Figure 2: Joint Video and Action Prediction. DreamZero jointly generates video and action. We observe
that the predicted actions closely align with the generated video. The examples are from totally unseen tasks.

demonstrations per task. Although other WAMs show that priors learned from videos prediction improves
sample efficiency for action learning compared to VLAs (Liao et al., 2025; Pai et al., 2025), most works still
focus on repeated demonstrations. Moreover, the environment generalization of DreamZero is retained even
after task-specific post-training, outperforming state-of-the-art VLAs by 10% on average task progress. Lastly,
we demonstrate two forms of cross-embodiment transfer. First, video-only demonstrations from another robot
(YAM) or humans yield a relative improvement of over 42% on unseen task performance for the target robot
(AgiBot G1) with just 10–20 minutes of data. Second, and more surprisingly, we show that DreamZero
enables few-shot embodiment adaptation: a model pretrained on AgiBot G1 adapts to an entirely new robot
(YAM) with only 30 minutes of play data, retaining zero-shot generalization. To the best of our knowledge,
this sets a new benchmark for data-efficient embodiment adaptation.

DreamZero is a 14B autoregressive diffusion transformer trained with a teacher-forcing chunk-wise video
denoising objective. Our architectural analysis reveals that larger pretrained video diffusion models produce
higher-quality video predictions, which directly translates to superior downstream action execution—indicating
that policy performance is fundamentally tied to video generation quality. We further find that diverse
distribution of the training data is essential for generalization, outperforming multi-task repetitive data with
the same amount of hours. Furthermore, we observe that autoregressive architectures lead to smoother robot
motions and higher modality alignment between predicted videos and executed actions.

To address the computational overhead inherent to video diffusion models, we introduce a suite of optimizations
spanning three categories: (1) algorithmic improvements, including decoupled video and action denoising
schedules (DreamZero-Flash); (2) system-level parallelism and caching strategies; and (3) low-level opti-
mizations such as quantization, and CUDA kernel tuning. Collectively, these techniques achieve a 38× inference
speedup without degrading performance, enabling DreamZero to generate action chunks at approximately
7Hz for smooth, real-time robotic control.

Our main contributions are:

• We introduce DreamZero, a 14B WAM that jointly predicts video and actions, enabling effective learning
  from diverse, non-repetitive robot data.
• We demonstrate over 2× improvement in zero-shot generalization to unseen verbs and motions compared
  to state-of-the-art VLAs, while retaining generalization across objects and environments.
• We present model and system optimizations achieving 38× inference speedup, enabling real-time closed-
  loop control at 7Hz.
• We demonstrate cross-embodiment transfer: video-only data from humans (12 minutes) or other robots (20
  minutes) yields a relative improvement of over 42% on unseen tasks, and introduce few-shot embodiment
  adaptation—DreamZero pretrained on AgiBot G1 adapts to an entirely new robot (YAM) with only 30
  minutes of play data, enabling zero-shot generalization.
• We open-source our model weights, inference code, and code to run publicly available real-world (RoboArena)



                                                                                                                     3
                                                                  World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies




 Stack green bowl on the blue bowl           Unplug the cable                       Fist bump the human                Pick up mango and put on tray                   Flip light switch off




     Throw trash into trash can             Place bag in basket               Grab eraser and wipe whiteboard           Pull wipe and wipe the table            Reach inside the box to grab pear




 Pick up juice box and insert into cup         Pull the cart                 Pick up tool and hand it to human                  Slide the box                            Fold the shorts




 Push rolling chair back under desk      Pick a card from the deck        Pass spatula from right arm to left arm   Grab the sauce bottle and pour into cup   Move cube in the direction of the arrow



Figure 3: Free-form Evaluation. DreamZero performs a diverse range of tasks when conditioned on natural
language instructions, including object manipulation, tool use, and human-robot interaction.


   and simulation benchmarks (PolaRiS and Genie Sim 3.0)1 at https://github.com/dreamzero0/dreamzero.


2. Related Work
2.1. Vision Language Action Models
Utilizing Foundation Models for Robotics. Developing foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021) for
physical artificial intelligence has emerged as a significant research frontier. One line of work involves using
existing, pre-trained foundation models as “black-box” reasoners to handle high-level task planning. These works
usually involve modular systems, where the foundation models generate sequences of instructions, visual traces,
or affordances that are subsequently executed by specialized, low-level robotic policies or controllers (Brohan
et al., 2023; Driess et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023; Kumar et al., 2026; Singh et al., 2023). While this
modularity simplifies complex planning and enables stronger generalization (Kaelbling and Lozano-Pérez;
Lee et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025) and efficiency (Dreczkowski et al., 2025), it is contingent upon having a
pre-existing library of low-level skills and a robust interface to bridge the gap between abstract reasoning and
physical execution. Additionally, these decoupled systems face the risk of compounding errors across modules.

VLAs. On the other hand, end-to-end models such as Vision-Language-Action models (VLAs) (Bjorck et al.,
2025; Black et al., 2024; Brohan et al., 2022, 2023; Bu et al., 2025; Gemini Robotics Team, 2025; Kim et al.,
2024; Physical Intelligence, 2025; Yang et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025), have gained popularity
by moving away from a rigid hierarchy of planning and control, combining language-conditioned semantics
and low-level robot actions within the same model. VLAs are often initialized from large vision-language (VLM)
models pre-trained on web-scale datasets. While pushing the frontier on visual-semantic knowledge transfer,
these models are pre-trained on static image-text datasets, which limits their ability to inherit spatiotemporal
priors required to transfer knowledge to new physical skills.

Generalization in VLAs. Generalization in VLAs has been mostly demonstrated on object and semantic
level (Brohan et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2025) while generalization to completely new skills and environments has
   1 Despite only being trained on ∼500 hours of real-world data, DreamZero shows non-trivial performance on Genie Sim 3.0, which is

a simulation benchmark comprised of 100 different tasks without being explicitly trained on the 10k hours of simulation training data.



                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                       World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



remained limited. In particular, existing work utilizing VLAs achieves environment generalization by collecting
human teleoperation data across hundreds of diverse environments for specific tasks (Physical Intelligence,
2025). Furthermore, while current VLAs attempt to achieve task generalization by covering a large library
of language-conditioned motion primitives (Gemini Robotics Team, 2025), this approach is fundamentally
constrained by the impracticality of capturing the vast amount of possible physical interactions and motions
with a fixed set of episode-level language-conditioned tasks. In contrast, video-based world models learn from
every consecutive frame pair in the data, while also leveraging large-scale video pretraining to understand
physical dynamics.

2.2. Video Model-based Robot Policies
Video Generation in Robotics. Prior works show that video generation models can be used to synthesize
robot trajectories and extract executable actions at test-time through various approaches: inverse-dynamics
models (Du et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024), optical flow as dense correspondence (Ko et al., 2024), or
trajectory prediction as high-level planning (Du et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024). Other works generate human
videos—either with 3D tracking (Liang et al., 2024) or for novel scenes and motions (Bharadhwaj et al., 2024;
Chen et al., 2025)—and train policies using point tracking objectives. Most recently, (Jang et al., 2025; Luo
et al., 2025) demonstrated that video generation models can produce synthetic robot data for unseen behaviors
in novel environments, leveraging the strong generalization capabilities of these models.

Joint Video and Action Generation. Another line of work couples video and action generation for end-to-end
learning. These methods demonstrate that incorporating a world modeling objective alongside action prediction
improves multi-task performance, sample efficiency, and generalization to novel scenes and objects. Previous
work (Cheang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025; Won et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2025; Zheng et al.,
2025; Zhu et al., 2025) learns to do joint world modeling and action prediction from scratch or from VLAs,
while more recent work (Hu et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2026; Liang et al., 2025; Liao et al., 2025; Pai et al., 2025)
leverages pretrained video diffusion models to inherit rich visual dynamics priors. We refer to these models
collectively as World Action Models (WAMs) since they leverage world modeling capability (predicting the future
state) for action prediction. We use the term World Action Models (WAMs) rather than Video Action Models
(VAMs) to reflect that video is just one possible world modeling objective—future WAMs may align actions with
other predictive modalities such as tactile sensing, force feedback, or learned latent representations. In contrast
to prior WAMs, DreamZero systematically explores data diversity and scale to expose the full generalization
potential of WAMs, adopts an autoregressive architecture better suited for long-horizon world–action modeling,
achieves state-of-the-art generalization across both novel tasks and environments, and achieves state-of-the-art
cross-embodiment tranfer, both learning from different embodiments (video only) and few-shot adaptation to
a new embodiment.

Why WAMs. WAMs built upon video diffusion backbones inherit rich spatiotemporal priors from web-scale
data, capturing the best of both paradigms: the seamless gradient flow of end-to-end VLAs and dense world
modeling supervision for planning. Unlike latent world models (Assran et al., 2025; Hafner et al., 2019,
2020, 2023), which learn dynamics from scratch in compact latent spaces, WAMs leverage pretrained video
representations that already encode physical dynamics from internet-scale data. Central to this approach
is learning the joint distribution of video and action—DreamZero simultaneously learns both modalities,
with video prediction serving as an implicit visual planner that guides action generation. This formulation
not only means that improving robotic capabilities reduces to improving video generation, but also enables
three capabilities that elude current VLAs: zero-shot generalization to novel tasks, effective learning from
heterogeneous robot data, and extremely efficient cross-embodiment transfer from videos. We provide further
discussion about the differences between WAMs and alternative world model architectures (e.g., latent-space,
3D point cloud) in Appendix A.




                                                                                                                 5
                                         World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies




Figure 4: Model Architecture of DreamZero. The model takes three inputs: visual context (encoded via a
VAE), language instructions (via a text encoder), and proprioceptive state (via a state encoder). These are
processed by an autoregressive DiT backbone using flow matching, which jointly predicts future video frames
and actions through separate decoders. During training (left), for each chunk, the model denoises noisy video
and action latents conditioned on clean video context. During inference (right), predictions are executed
asynchronously in the real world, and ground-truth observations are fed back into the KV cache to prevent
error accumulation.


3. DreamZero
Pretrained video diffusion models offer rich spatiotemporal priors from web-scale data, making them attractive
backbones for robot policies. However, converting these models into effective World Action Models (WAMs)
presents three key challenges: (1) Video-action alignment: jointly predicting video and actions requires tight
coupling between visual futures and motor commands, yet naively combining separate video and action heads
can lead to misalignment; (2) Architectural design: it remains unclear whether bidirectional or autoregressive
architectures are better suited for WAMs, with implications in modality alignment, error accumulation, and
inference efficiency; and (3) Real-time inference: video diffusion models require iterative denoising across
high-dimensional latent spaces, making them prohibitively slow for closed-loop control.

DreamZero addresses these challenges through three design choices. First, we train a single end-to-end
model that jointly denoises video and action with a shared objective, ensuring deep integration between
modalities. Second, we adopt an autoregressive architecture and exploit the closed-loop setting: after each
action chunk is executed, we replace predicted frames with ground-truth observations in the KV cache,
eliminating compounding errors while enabling efficient inference via KV caching and preserving native frame
rates for precise modality alignment (See right side of Figure 4). Third, we introduce a suite of system-,
implementation-, and model-level optimizations that achieve a 38× inference speedup, enabling real-time
control at 7Hz. We detail the model architecture in Section 3.1 and real-time execution in Section 3.2.

3.1. Model Architecture
Problem Formulation. DreamZero jointly predicts video o𝑙:𝑙+𝐻 and actions a𝑙:𝑙+𝐻 conditioned on language
instruction c, proprioceptive state q𝑙 and visual observation including the current and the past history o0:𝑙
where 𝐻 > 0 is a fixed horizon and 𝑙 is a random index sampled from a trajectory. Note that joint prediction of
video and action is a decomposition of (1) autoregressive video prediction and (2) action prediction from an
inverse-dynamics model (IDM):

                 𝜋0 (o𝑙:𝑙+𝐻 , a𝑙:𝑙+𝐻 | o0:𝑙 , c, q𝑙 ) = 𝜋0 (o𝑙:𝑙+𝐻 | o0:𝑙 , c, q𝑙 ) 𝜋0 (a𝑙:𝑙+𝐻 | o0:𝑙+𝐻 , q𝑙 )   (1)
                 ⏟                ⏞                     ⏟            ⏞              ⏟           ⏞
                          DreamZero                          video prediction                 IDM




                                                                                                                  6
                                        World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



Instead of using two separate models (video prediction model and inverse dynamics model) to model the
decomposed objective (Li et al., 2026; Pai et al., 2025), we train a single model end-to-end with joint prediction
objective. We believe that this end-to-end design enables better video-action alignment through a deep
integration between the two modalities. Since pretrained video models are already optimized on the video
prediction objective on diverse web-scale video data, DreamZero only needs to additionally learn to predict
videos for the robot embodiment videos and extract corresponding actions from the generated videos. We
further hypothesize that this encourages better generalization than the conventional practice of training VLA
from VLM , as our approach explicitly learns temporal dynamics from video frames used both as conditioning
inputs and prediction targets.

Model Architecture. The model architecture is shown in Figure 4. To retain the generalization capability of
video models, we introduce minimal additional parameters: state encoders, action encoders, and decoders.
For robot training data that contains multiple views, we concatenate all views into a single frame instead of
making architectural changes to the backbone model.

In particular, DreamZero is trained to predict video frames and corresponding actions autoregressively.
Autoregressive generation possesses the following advantages: (1) it enables faster inference speed by utilizing
KV-cache, (2) the policy model can leverage the visual observation history as guidance for the next generation,
and (3) it avoids the modality alignment challenges (video, action, and language alignment) inherent to
bidirectional models. Concretely, bidirectional diffusion typically requires processing fixed-length sequences,
which often necessitates video subsampling that distorts native FPS, potentially harming video-action alignment.
On the other hand, autoregressive generation leverages KV caching to support arbitrarily long contexts within
a single forward pass. This preserves the native frame rate, ensuring precise alignment between video frames
and robot actions. Some details illustration of this difference is provided in Appendix B.

We introduce autoregressive modeling only for the video modality to avoid error propagation coming from
closed-loop action prediction. DreamZero is trained to predict video frames in a chunk manner; each chunk
has a fixed number of latent frames 𝐾 to match the action horizon. Chunk-wise generation enables training on
variable length of videos, similar to how LLMs are trained on variable length of language tokens. We provide
more details on the QKV attention masking strategy for the different modalities in Appendix C.

Training Objective. Similar to recent video diffusion models and VLAs, we employ flow-matching (Albergo
et al., 2023; Lipman et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022) as the training objective (Ali et al., 2025; Team Wan, 2025;
Teng et al., 2025). Unlike recent WAMs (Kim et al., 2026; Li et al., 2025; Liao et al., 2025; Zhu et al., 2025),
DreamZero shares the denoising timestep between video and action modality for faster convergence at the
beginning of training. Also, we apply teacher forcing (Gao et al., 2024; Jin et al., 2024) as a training objective;
the model is trained to denoise the noisy current chunk conditioned on the clean previous chunks.

Formally, given a chunk index 𝑘 > 0 and the denoising timestep 𝑡𝑘 ∈ [0, 1], we denote the corresponding noisy
video latent vector for original video o𝑘 as z𝑘𝑡𝑘 and noisy normalized actions as a𝑘𝑡𝑘 . All frames within the same
chunk share the same timestep 𝑡𝑘 , while different chunks are assigned independent timesteps. Our model
denoises z𝑘𝑡𝑘 and a𝑘𝑡𝑘 , defined as linear interpolations between clean vectors and random Gaussian noises:

                              z𝑘𝑡𝑘 = 𝑡𝑘 z𝑘1 + (1 − 𝑡𝑘 )z𝑘0 ,   a𝑘𝑡𝑘 = 𝑡𝑘 a𝑘1 + (1 − 𝑡𝑘 )a𝑘0 ,                  (2)

where z𝑘0 ∼ 𝒩 (0, I), a𝑘0 ∼ 𝒩 (0, I), and z𝑘1 and a𝑘1 are a clean video latent vector and a normalized action,
respectively. Thus, the clean context from the previous chunks can be denoted as 𝒞𝑘 = {(z𝑗1 , a𝑗1 )}𝑘−1
                                                                                                    𝑗=1 .

We train the model u𝜃 to predict the joint velocity for both modalities using the following flow-matching
objective:                            [︃                                                           ]︃
                                            𝐾
                                         1 ∑︁                                                    2
                                              𝑤(𝑡𝑘 )⃦u𝜃 ([z𝑘𝑡𝑘 , a𝑘𝑡𝑘 ]; 𝒞𝑘 , c, q𝑘 , 𝑡𝑘 ) − v𝑘 ⃦ ,
                                                    ⃦                                           ⃦
                    ℒ(𝜃) = Ez,a,{𝑡𝑘 }                                                                 (3)
                                         𝐾
                                              𝑘=1



                                                                                                                 7
                                              World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



where 𝑤(𝑡𝑘 ) > 0 is a predefined weight function for 𝑡𝑘 , c is the text condition, q𝑘 is the proprioceptive states of
𝑘-th chunk, and the velocity v𝑘 := [z𝑘1 , a𝑘1 ] − [z𝑘0 , a𝑘0 ]. To enable efficient training, we perform trajectory-level
updates and apply attention masking (e.g., see Figure 14 for details) so that the current noisy chunk can attend
to clean context of previous chunks. We provide the pseudo-code in Algorithm 1.

Model Inference. As shown in Figure 4, during inference, DreamZero jointly denoises video and action
chunks, leveraging KV caching for efficiency (Huang et al., 2025; Teng et al., 2025; Yin et al., 2025). Unlike
pure video generation, our closed-loop setting allows ground-truth observations to replace generated frames in
the KV cache after each action execution (see Figure 14). This eliminates the compounding error problem
inherent to autoregressive video generation—a key advantage unique to WAMs. Moreover, as a stateful policy,
DreamZero can leverage visual history for tasks requiring memory.2 . We provide the pseudo-code of inference
in Algorithm 2

3.2. Real-time Execution of DreamZero
Diffusion-based WAMs inherit powerful generalization from video foundation models, but their iterative
denoising process creates a fundamental tension with reactive robotic control. We address two questions: (1)
What prevents WAMs from being reactive policies? (2) How do we resolve this for real-time control?

3.2.1. The Reactivity Gap
Reactive policies must respond to environmental changes within tens of milliseconds. A naive implementation
of DreamZero on a single GPU requires approximately 5.7 seconds per action chunk due to three bottlenecks:
(1) iterative denoising across 16 diffusion steps required for smooth actions, (2) the computational cost of a
14B parameter DiT backbone, and (3) sequential execution that blocks robot motion during inference. This
latency makes closed-loop control infeasible.3

3.2.2. Asynchronous Closed-Loop Execution
Our first step towards resolving this is through asynchronous execution that decouples inference from action
execution. Rather than waiting for each inference to complete, the motion controller continuously executes the
most recent action chunk while inference runs concurrently on the latest observation. This structure transforms
the latency constraint from “inference must complete before the robot moves” to “inference must complete
before the current action chunk expires.” In our experiments, we deploy policies at an action horizon of 48
steps at 30Hz control frequency (1.6 seconds per chunk) for bimanual manipulation robots. Hence, we target
inference latency below approximately 200ms to ensure sufficient overlap for smooth, reactive control.

3.2.3. System-level Optimizations
Given the asynchronous execution structure, we optimize inference throughput through parallelism and caching.

    • CFG Parallelism. Classifier-free guidance (Ho and Salimans, 2022) requires two forward passes (condi-
      tional and unconditional). We distribute these across two GPUs, reducing per-step latency by 47%.
    • DiT Caching. We exploit the directional consistency of velocity predictions during flow matching. When
      cosine similarity between successive velocities exceeds a threshold, we reuse cached velocities, reducing
      effective DiT steps from 16 to 4 with minimal quality loss on action prediction.

3.2.4. Implementation-level Optimizations
We further reduce latency through compiler and kernel enhancements.
   2 In this work, we do not explicitly evaluate or post-train DreamZero on tasks that can only succeed with memory. We leave this for

future work.
   3 One might expect that generating only actions (not video) would accelerate inference, but at 14B scale we empirically found out

that the speed gain is minimal—the number of diffusion steps and the number of DiT blocks dominate latency. Moreover, because video
and action are jointly trained for strong cross-modal alignment, naively reducing action denoising steps degrades quality. This motivates
DreamZero-Flash.




                                                                                                                                       8
                                                                             World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



   • Torch Compile and CUDA Graphs. We apply torch.compile with CUDA Graphs to eliminate CPU
     overhead and fuse operators. Static shapes cause recompilations only during the first trajectory.
   • Post-Training Quantization. On Blackwell architecture, we quantize weights and activations to NVFP4
     while keeping sensitive operations (QKV, Softmax) in FP8 and non-linear operations in FP16.
   • Kernel and Scheduler Enhancements. We use the cuDNN backend for attention and migrate scheduler
     operations to GPU to eliminate CPU-GPU synchronization stalls.

                                        Video Timestep Sampling (tkvideo)                                                                Action Timestep Sampling (tkaction)
                                 7         Coupled (Uniform tkvideo)                                                              7         Coupled (Uniform tkaction)
                                           Decoupled (tkvideo = 1 ,     Beta(7.0, 1.0))                                                     Decoupled (Uniform tkaction)
                                 6                                                                                                6
           Probability Density




                                                                                                            Probability Density
                                 5                                                                                                5
                                 4                                                                                                4
                                 3                                                                                                3
                                 2                                                                                                2
                                 1                                                                                                1
                                 00.0         0.2          0.4         0.6         0.8           1.0                              00.0         0.2          0.4            0.6   0.8          1.0
                                                        Timestep (tkvideo)                                                                               Timestep (tkaction)
                                     high noise level                                     low noise level                             high noise level                                 low noise level

Figure 5: Decoupled Noise Schedules. DreamZero (blue) uses coupled noise for video and action (both
uniform). DreamZero-Flash (red) biases video toward high-noise states via a Beta distribution while keeping
action noise uniform, training the model to predict clean actions from noisy visual context.

3.2.5. Model-level Optimizations: DreamZero-Flash
Even with system optimizations, the number of diffusion steps remains the primary latency bottleneck. However,
naively reducing steps degrades action quality because residual visual noise propagates into action predictions.

DreamZero-Flash addresses this by decoupling video and action noise schedules during training. The key
insight is that, at inference time, actions should denoise to their final values while being conditioned on a
still-noisy video representation within the current chunk, since with very few denoising steps (e.g., fewer than
4), the generated video tokens may remain inaccurate and thus provide a noisy conditioning signal. Standard
DreamZero samples a shared timestep 𝑡𝑘 ∼ 𝒰(0, 1) for both modalities. This creates a train-test mismatch:
during training, the model learns to predict actions when video and action are at the same noise level, but
few-step or single-step inference requires predicting clean actions while video remains partially noisy.

DreamZero-Flash closes this gap by biasing video timesteps toward high-noise states via 𝑡video 𝑘   = 1 − 𝜂, where
𝜂 ∼ Beta(𝛼, 𝛽) with 𝛼 > 𝛽. In practice, we use Beta(7, 1) as an example configuration, yielding E[𝑡video
                                                                                                     𝑘   ] = 0.125
(predominantly noisy), while action timesteps remain uniform (Figure 5). During training, this exposes the
model to configurations where it must predict clean actions from noisy visual context, directly matching the
few-step or single-step inference regime. As a result, we reduce the diffusion steps from four to one, cutting
inference from ∼350ms to ∼150ms with minimal performance loss (Table 3). Moreover, the Flash formulation
enables flexible training configurations—such as varying the noise sampling ratios of video and action—to
better align training with different few-step or single-step inference regimes. In practice, we mainly apply Flash
training as the final stage following the main DreamZero model training.

Action Chunk Smoothing. To suppress high-frequency noise in generated actions, we upsample chunks to 2×
resolution, apply a Savitzky-Golay filter, and downsample to original resolution.

3.2.6. Summary
Table 1 summarizes cumulative speedups. System and implementation optimizations yield ∼9× speedup on
H100 and ∼16× on GB200; adding DreamZero-Flash achieves 38× on GB200, reducing latency from 5.7s to


                                                                                                                                                                                                         9
                                               World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



150ms. With the exception of DiT caching and quantization, all system and implementation-level optimizations
are mathematically equivalent to baseline and show no measurable performance degradation.

                                 Optimization                                        H100       GB200
                                 Baseline                                              1×        1.1×
                                   System-level
                                    + CFG Parallelism                                1.9×        1.8×
                                    + DiT Caching                                    5.5×        5.4×
                                   Implementation-level
                                    + Torch Compile + CUDA Graphs                    8.9×        10.9×
                                    + Kernel & Scheduler Opts.                       9.6×        14.8×
                                    + Quantization (NVFP4)                            —          16.6×
                                   Model-level
                                   + DreamZero-Flash                                   —          38×

                                 Table 1: Cumulative inference speedups. Each row
                                 includes all optimizations above it. Entries marked “—”
                                 indicate features not applicable to that hardware.

4. Experimental Setup
We validate our main hypotheses about learning from diverse data on two robot embodiments: the AgiBot G1
mobile bimanual manipulator and the Franka single-arm robot. We pretrain separately for each embodiment,
leaving multi-embodiment training for future work. For cross-embodiment experiments, we utilize both the
YAM robot and human egocentric data. The experimental setup for AgiBot G1 is illustrated in Figure 7.

We compare against two state-of-the-art Vision-Language-Action models (VLAs): GR00T N1.6 (Bjorck et al.,
2025) and 𝜋0.5 (Physical Intelligence, 2025). For each baseline, we evaluate two initialization strategies:
(1) from-scratch, using pretrained VLM weights without prior robot data training for a fair apple-to-apple
comparison with DreamZero, and (2) from-pretrained, using official checkpoints pretrained on thousands of
hours of cross-embodiment robot data. Both variants are then trained on identical data as DreamZero: ∼500
hours of teleoperation data we collected for AgiBot G1, and DROID (Khazatsky et al., 2024) for Franka. We
keep the compute budget comparable across all methods by matching total batch size and gradient steps.4

4.1. Pretraining
Data. Our data collection philosophy differs from that of existing VLAs. While recent works have shown that
VLAs can learn effective policies from moderate-sized datasets, these approaches typically rely on structured,
task-focused demonstrations to ensure consistent behavior. We hypothesize that learning to only predict
actions without encoding the knowledge about future world states makes it challenging to leverage highly
heterogeneous, non-repetitive data effectively, as the model must implicitly infer dynamics from noisy state-
action pairs. In contrast, we hypothesize DreamZero’s world modeling objective enables effective learning
from diverse demonstrations, allowing us to prioritize breadth and utility over repetition during data collection.

Using AgiBot G1, we collect approximately 500 hours of teleoperation data across 22 unique environments (see
Figure 15), including homes, restaurants, supermarkets, coffee shops, and offices—prioritizing task diversity
and real-world utility over task-specific repetition. As shown in Figure 6, each episode averages around
4.4 minutes and encompasses approximately 42 subtasks—significantly longer-horizon than typical robotic
manipulation datasets (Khazatsky et al., 2024; Walke et al., 2023). The skill distribution reflects real-world
deployment requirements: navigation enables movement between workspaces, while torso adjustments allow
  4 For from-pretrained baselines, this constitutes continual training on top of the official weights.




                                                                                                               10
                                                                      World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies


                35                                                          Total: 7,193 episodes                                                                                                                    Total: 7,193 episodes
                                                                                    Mean: 4.4 min                       10                                                                                            Mean: 42.4 subtasks
                30
                                                                                                                         8
                25
 % Percentage




                                                                                                         % Percentage
                20                                                                                                       6

                15
                                                                                                                         4
                10
                                                                                                                         2
                 5

                 0                                                                                                       0
                     0   1    2    3     4           5            6   7     8          9            10                       0   5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85    90   95   100 105 110
                                             Duration (minutes)                                                                                                         Number of Subtasks

                             (a) Episode Duration Distribution                                                                       (b) Subtask Count Distribution per Episode




                                                                                  (c) Skill Distribution

Figure 6: Distribution statistics for the AgiBot pretraining corpus: episode durations, subtask density, and
skill coverage across 7.2K episodes (∼500 hours).

interaction with objects at varying heights (shelves, cabinets). Additional details on the data collection pipeline
are provided in Appendix E.5

We also validate DreamZero on the Franka single-arm robot using DROID (Khazatsky et al., 2024), one
of the most heterogeneous publicly available robotic datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of WAMs on
diverse, open-source data and enables reproducibility prior to the release of our in-house AgiBot dataset. We
open-source the checkpoint and inference code to run some DROID-sim evals in PolaRiS (Jain et al., 2025).6

Training. We use Wan2.1-I2V-14B-480P (Team Wan, 2025), a 14B image-to-video diffusion model, as the
backbone for DreamZero. We train for 100K steps with a global batch size of 128 for AgiBot and 100K steps
with a global batch size of 128 for DROID datasets. We update all DiT blocks, the state encoder, action encoder,
and action decoder, while freezing the text encoder, image encoder, and VAE.7 For both datasets, we filter out
idle actions and use relative joint positions as the default action representation. We also conduct some ablations
(Section 5.2) where we initialize from Wan2.1-I2V-5B-480P to see the effect of model size (5B vs. 14B).

Evaluation Protocol. We evaluate models out of the box after pretraining. Our default evaluation setting
is unseen environments, unseen objects—because our pretraining and post-training data were collected in a
different geographic location from our evaluation sites, every benchmark inherently tests out-of-distribution
generalization rather than interpolation within the training distribution. We evaluate on two categories: seen
and unseen tasks. We define the granularity of a task as a combination of the motion required for the task and
  5We plan to open-source this dataset in upcoming releases. Some samples can be found at https://dreamzero0.github.io/training_

data_gallery
  6 Available at https://github.com/dreamzero0/dreamzero.
  7We experimented with LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) but found it led to suboptimal results.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11
                                                            World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies


                                        Pre-training                                                                             Post-training
                               Diverse mobile manipulation                                                                 Repetitive & Task-specific




       packing         restocking            dish cleanup           laundry folding       tidying          fruit packing                shirt folding               table bussing


                                       Seen Tasks Evals                                                                    Out-of-distribution Evals




    organize shirts   bowl stacking           pen to cup            short folding     fruit pick & place
                                                                                                                 new table height, distance, objects, object placements, etc.
                                       Unseen Task Evals




     untie shoes      stacking cubes       pressing elevator        taking hat off     ironing clothes



Figure 7: AgiBot Evaluation Set-up. We are first-citizens of generalization evals, where the default setting is
unseen environment and unseen objects.

the object type. For example, if the training data contains folding a red-colored shirt and evaluate the model to
fold a black-colored shirt with a different size, it is considered as a seen task. On the other hand, if we evaluate
the model to fold socks, it is considered as an unseen task because the motion required to fold socks is different
from folding a shirt (See samples in Figure 7).

AgiBot Evaluation Protocol. For seen tasks, we select 10 tasks from the pretraining distribution, including
pick-and-place variants, stacking, wiping, and folding; we run 8 rollouts per task across 4 robots, each in
different environments and different objects (80 rollouts total per checkpoint). We divide 10 seen tasks into
three categories: PnP-Easy (Pick and place fruit, Wipe the mess, Take out fruit from bag), PnP-Hard (Pick
and place fork/spoon, put the pen in pen holder, put the cup on the coaster, stack bowls/cups in a row), and
Contact-Rich Manipulation (fold shirts, fold shorts, stack clothes). For unseen tasks, we evaluate 10 tasks absent
from training—such as ironing, painting, pulling carts, cube stacking, removing a hat from a mannequin, and
untying shoe laces—with 8 rollouts per task across 4 robots (80 rollouts total per checkpoint). The full list of
each evaluation rollout initial frame and prompt is provided in Appendix F, and some evaluation rollouts can
be found here.8

DROID Evaluation Protocol. We evaluate on 20 seen tasks and 20 unseen tasks (verbs absent from DROID),
performing 2 rollouts per task, for a total of 80 evaluation rollouts across 40 tasks for each checkpoint. We
compare DreamZero against the publicly released 𝜋0.5 -DROID and an internally trained GR00T N1.6-DROID
checkpoint. Object positions are fixed across checkpoints to ensure fairness. Each rollout is scored from 0 to
1.0 based on partial task completion; full details are provided in Appendix G.

4.2. Post-training
Beyond pre-training, we evaluate whether WAMs improve fine-tuning performance on task-specific data using
the AgiBot robot.

Data. We collect post-training data on three downstream tasks:

• Shirt folding (33 hrs): Fold a flattened t-shirt through 5 sequential stages. We randomize initial shirt position
  across 2 shirt types.
    8 https://dreamzero0.github.io for main evaluation rollouts and https://dreamzero0.github.io/evals_gallery for accumu-

lation of unique evaluation rollouts.




                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                               World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



   • Fruit packing (12 hrs): Pack 10 fruits from a table into a bag. We randomize fruit combinations and positions
     of fruits and bag.
   • Table bussing (40 hrs): Clear 5 pieces of trash into a trash bin and 5 pieces of dishware (dish, bowl, fork, and
     spoon) into a dish bin. We randomize object types, combinations, and positions.

  Training. We post-train for 50K steps per task. As in pretraining, we update all parameters except the text
  encoder, image encoder, and VAE.

Evaluation Protocol. We measure average task progress across 10 rollouts per task. Task progress is defined as:
(1) folding stages completed out of 5 for shirt folding, (2) fruits successfully packed out of 10 for fruit packing
and (3) items cleared for table bussing. Following Barreiros et al. (2025), we apply an image overlay to the
initial scene to reduce variance.


   5. Experimental Results
   5.1. Main Results

                                                                                              AgiBot G1                                                                                                      DROID-Franka
Success Rate / Task Progress (%)




                                   100                           93.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                       82                              75
                                    80                                                                                                                                                            69
                                                                                                                                                                  62.2                      62
                                    60                    52.1                                                                                                                                                              42 42
                                                                                             48.4                             49.0
                                    40                                                                                                                     27.4
                                                                                      22.7
                                    20         17.6                                                                                          8.4
                                                                                                                        9.2
                                                                            4.7
                                         2.1          0                 0         0                  0 4.2 0                         0.6            0
                                     0
                                                 PnP Easy                     PnP Hard                       Contact-Rich                         AVG                                            AVG                             AVG
                                                                                                                                            (Task Progress)                                (Task Progress)                  (Success Rate)

                                                                            GR00T N1.6 (Scratch)          GR00T N1.6 (Pretrained)          0.5 (Scratch)            0.5 (Pretrained)   DreamZero (Scratch)


   Figure 8: Seen Task Evaluation. DreamZero effectively learns from diverse data and generalizes to new
   environments, outperforming VLAs across all task categories. VLAs trained from scratch achieve near-zero suc-
   cess, while pretrained VLAs show modest performance—likely benefiting from embodiment-specific knowledge
   acquired through repetitive demonstrations during pretraining.

 We evaluate the zero-shot generalization performance of DreamZero compared to baseline models and
 investigate the following research questions:

 Q1. Do WAMs learn better from diverse, non-repetitive data?
 We evaluate pretrained models out-of-the-box on tasks present in the pretraining data, but in zero-shot
 environments with unseen objects. Results are shown in Figure 8.

  On AgiBot G1, from-scratch VLAs achieve near-zero task progress score across all categories. Even on simple
  pick-and-place tasks (PnP Easy), VLAs occasionally reach toward the correct object but fail to interact accurately
  with unseen objects in novel environments. In contrast, DreamZero successfully learns from heterogeneous
  data, achieving 62.2% average task progress—over 2× higher than the best pretrained VLA baseline (27.4%),
  despite those baselines being pretrained on thousands of hours of cross-embodiment robot data before continued
  training on our data mix. On DROID-Franka, we show a similar result as well; DreamZero which is only
  trained on the DROID dataset outperforms pre-trained baseline models trained on multiple robot embodiment
  data.

 We attribute this gap to the joint video-action formulation: while VLAs require massive robot data to learn
 direct observation-to-a ction mappings, WAMs leverage video generation as a strong prior for action prediction,
 enabling effective learning of diverse data and generalization to unseen environments. Notably, we observe tight


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                             World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



                                                                                                                                                     AgiBot G1
                                      100
                                                                                                      85.7
Average Task Progress (%)




                                          80

                                          60
                                                                                               42.9                                                                    46.9
                                          40                                                                                        35.7
                                                                     28.1                                                                                                                                                           28.6                           28.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                        23.9
                                          20                                                                                                                    18.8                                                         17.9
                                                                                    12.5                                     14.3                                                                                                                           14.3
                                                               9.4                                                                                  6.2                                          6.2               6.2                     7.1
                                                  0 0.1 0                      0           0                   0 0 0                          0             0                   0 0 0                          0         0                       0 0
                                          0                                                                                                                                                                                                         7. Ironing
                                                   1. Untie Shoelaces               2. Remove Hat                  3. Draw with Pen               4. Take Out Straw                  5. Cube Stacking          6. Painting w/ Brush
                                                                                   from Mannequin
                                          80
                                                                                                              AgiBot G1                                                                                                              DROID-Franka
       Success Rate / Task Progress (%)




                                                                        59.2
                                          60                                                                                                                                                                                  49
                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                                                                                     39.5
                                          40                                                                                                                                                                       31 33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 22.5
                                                                  25
                                                       18.8                                                                                                                   16.3                                                                  12.5
                                          20                                                                                          14.3                                                                                                                 7.5
                                                                                                             8.2                                                 5
                                                   0          0                     0      0    0      0               0    0     0                       0.7             0
                                          0
                                                       8. Shake Hands                      9. Fold Map                     10. Pulling Cart                           AVG                                                AVG                             AVG
                                                                                                                                                                (Task Progress)                                    (Task Progress)                  (Success Rate)
                                                                            GR00T N1.6 (Scratch)                GR00T N1.6 (Pretrained)                   0.5 (Scratch)              0.5 (Pretrained)          DreamZero (Scratch)


   Figure 9: Zero-shot Generalization to Unseen Tasks. DreamZero achieves non-trivial task progress on 10
   tasks absent from training, while VLAs struggle across both embodiments.


   alignment between generated videos and real-world execution, even for suboptimal behaviors (Figure 16). Most
   DreamZero failures stem from video generation errors rather than action prediction—the policy faithfully
   executes whatever trajectory the video predicts. This suggests that improvements to the video backbone would
   directly translate to better WAM performance.

   Q2. Do WAMs generalize to unseen tasks?
   Figure 9 evaluates generalization to 10 tasks entirely absent from the pretraining distribution, including untying
   shoelaces, ironing, painting with a brush, and shaking hands.

 On AgiBot G1, from-scratch VLAs achieve near-zero task progress (< 1%), while DreamZero reaches 39.5%
 on average—with strong performance on tasks like “Remove Hat from Mannequin” (85.7%) and “Shake Hands”
 (59.2%). DreamZero also significantly outperforms pretrained VLA baselines (39.5% vs. 16.3%), even though
 those baselines may have encountered some of these tasks during cross-embodiment pretraining. Also on the
 DROID-Franka setup, DreamZero significantly outperforms (49% task progress, 22.5% success rate) other
 pretrained baselines (31% task progress, 12.5% success rate for GR00T N1.6 and 33% task progress, 7.5%
 success rate for 𝜋0.5 ).

  Qualitatively, we observe that pretrained VLAs often reach toward objects and attempt grasping regardless
  of the instruction, suggesting they overfit to dominant training behaviors (e.g., pick-and-place) rather than
  understanding novel task semantics, accounting for their partial task progress despite failing to complete
  the intended tasks. In contrast, DreamZero performs visual planning for unseen tasks and executes them
  successfully, with strong alignment between generated videos and real-world actions.

   Beyond structured evaluation, we conduct free-form testing on over 100+ additional tasks, including “Pop the
   ballon” and “Press elevator button”, by doing free-form prompting with verbal instructions.9
                                      9 Rollouts of these tasks are provided in https://dreamzero0.github.io/evals_gallery/.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                      World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies




                                                 92.5 92.5                                    96
                            100                                                                                                                                         90.5
                                                                                                                           76 83
Average Task Progress (%)




                                                                                                                                                                 79.8
                             80                                                         71
                                        65
                                                                            56
                             60                                                                                                                     53.3
                                                                                                                 39
                             40                                        27
                             20                                                                                                               9.8
                                  2.5        1.5                                   0                        0          0                                   0.5
                              0
                                        Shirt Folding                       Fruit Packing                        Table Bussing                             AVG
                                               GR00T N1.6 (Scratch)      GR00T N1.6 (Pretrained)     0.5 (Scratch)       0.5 (Pretrained)   DreamZero (Scratch)


Figure 10: Posttraining Results. WAMs enable stronger post-training results across three tasks, indicating that
environment generalization of DreamZero is retained after post-training.


Q3. Do WAMs improve post-training performance?
We investigate whether WAMs retain their generalization even after fine-tuning on task-specific data. Figure 10
shows results on three tasks with varying distribution diversity.

DreamZero matches or outperforms VLA baselines across all tasks: comparable performance on shirt folding
and table bussing while significantly outperforming on fruit packing. Similar to the findings from Figure 8 and
Figure 9, from-scratch baselines fail to learn accurate motions to grasp the target objects; this means that from-
scratch VLAs tend to overfit to the training data and fail to generalize to scenarios where we vary the table height,
table distance, objects, and object placements, mostly due to the evaluation site being in a different geographic
location (see Figure 7 for samples). Although pretraining on multiple robot embodiments with repetitive data
largely boosts the post-training genearlization performance for pretrained baselines, DreamZero still matches
or outperforms pretrained VLA baselines without cross embodiment pretraining. Since we still evaluate on
unseen environments for post-training, this implies that the environment generalization of DreamZero is
retained after post-training.

Q4. Do WAMs enable strong cross-embodiment transfer to unseen tasks?
Having shown that WAMs generalize to unseen tasks (Figure 9), we now investigate whether this generalization
can be further improved by leveraging video data from different embodiments performing the same tasks.
Crucially, we use only the video prediction objective for the cross-embodiment data (no actions), while
maintaining the joint video-action objective for the AgiBot pretraining data; the cross-embodiment data thus
serves as additional visual experience to strengthen the world model’s understanding of task dynamics and
expected behavior.

                                   YAM                                                       AgiBot G1                                              Humans




                                                        Robot2Robot Transfer                                    Human2Robot Transfer

Figure 11: Cross-Embodiment Transfer. We explore robot-to-robot (YAM → AgiBot) and human-to-robot
embodiment transfer to unseen tasks.


                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                              World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



We explore two settings (Figure 11): (1) Robot-to-robot transfer using the bimanual YAM robot, and (2)
Human-to-robot transfer using egocentric human demonstrations. For each setting, we collect 72 multi-view
trajectories of the 9 unseen tasks (8 demonstrations per task, 20 minutes for YAM, 12 minutes for human).10
We then co-train from the DreamZero-AgiBot checkpoint on a 1:1 mix with pretraining data for 10K steps.

Results on the 9 unseen tasks (Table 2) show that both transfer settings improve performance over the baseline
DreamZero. Robot-to-robot transfer yields the largest gain (38.3% → 55.4%), likely due to the narrower
embodiment gap; both YAM and AgiBot are bimanual parallel grippers. Human-to-robot transfer also improves
performance (38.3% → 54.3%), despite the larger morphological gap and dynamic egocentric viewpoints.

                                 Method                                             Task Progress
                                 DreamZero                                          38.3% ± 7.6%
                                 DreamZero + Human2Robot Transfer                   54.3% ± 10.4%
                                 DreamZero + Robot2Robot Transfer                   55.4% ± 9.5%

Table 2: Cross-Embodiment Transfer Results. Average task progress on unseen tasks (± standard error).
Both transfer settings improve over baseline (result from Table 9) using only 10–20 minutes of video-only
demonstration data.


These results point to a promising property of WAMs: unlike recent VLA approaches to embodiment transfer (Ka-
reer et al., 2025; Team, 2025), our method relies solely on visual information without action labels. While
current success rates remain moderate, the consistent improvement from just 10–20 minutes of video-only data
provides an early signal that cross-embodiment visual experience transfers meaningfully. This opens a potential
scaling pathway: abundant human video data—orders of magnitude larger than robot datasets—could enable
WAMs to acquire diverse skills without action annotation, pending further research into strengthening the
transfer mechanism.

Q5. Do WAMs enable few-shot new embodiment adaptation?
        Few-shot Embodiment Adaptation                                       Retaining Strong Language Following




                                                                         Put the cup noodles in the 
        Put the orange in 

                 AgiBot G1
         YAM

                                                                                 paper bag                     the pumpkin
                 (500 hrs)         (30 min)




                                                                           Pick up the teddy bear        Put banana in wooden shelf



Figure 12: Few-shot Embodiment Adaptation. We explore few-shot embodiment adaptation by post-training
on 30 minutes of new embodiment play data and evaluating on pick-and-place variants requiring strong
language following.

We post-trained the DreamZero-AgiBot checkpoint on a new bimanual manipulator (YAM robot) using only
55 trajectories across 11 unique tasks (∼30 minutes of data).11 As illustrated in Figure 12, despite limited
data and diversity, the post-trained policy retains strong language following ability, even generalizing to novel
 10We exclude Pulling Cart task since data collection through teleoperation was infeasible with our bimanual YAM robot setup.
 11We visualize the entire 30 minutes of play data https://dreamzero0.github.io/yam_gallery/




                                                                                                                                      16
                                               World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



objects unseen during training, including pumpkins, teddy bears, pens, cup noodles, and paper bags. Even
with minimal data, we observe tight video-action alignment, demonstrating very efficient cross-embodiment
transfer.

We hypothesize that two factors enable this efficiency: (1) the visual similarity of AgiBot G1 and YAM
embodiment (both equipped with bi-manual parallel grippers), and (2) more fundamentally, learning an
implicit IDM from predicted videos may be inherently more sample-efficient than direct policy learning—the
model only needs to learn the mapping from visual futures to actions, while leveraging the pretrained video
model’s existing understanding of physical dynamics. Consistent with our AgiBot findings, failures primarily
stem from video prediction errors rather than action extraction, suggesting that increasing task diversity during
post-training could further improve performance.12

Q6. Does DreamZero-Flash maintain performance with fewer denoising steps?
We evaluate whether DreamZero-Flash can maintain task performance under aggressive single-step denoising.
As shown in Table 3, reducing DreamZero from 4 denoising steps to 1 step drops task progress substantially
(83% → 52%) on the table bussing task. In contrast, DreamZero-Flash achieves a higher average success rate
(74%) at single-step inference, sitting only 9% below the 4-step baseline while being ∼2× faster. This suggests
that decoupled noise scheduling offers a more effective speed–accuracy trade-off for real-time deployment.

                Method                    Denoising steps        Task Progress       Inference speed        × Speed up
                DreamZero                          4              83% ± 6.1%                350ms                1
                DreamZero                          1              52% ± 10.2%               150ms              2.33×
                DreamZero-Flash                    1              74% ± 10.1%               150ms              2.33×

Table 3: DreamZero-Flash Evaluation. Task progress on table bussing with varying denoising steps (±
standard error). DreamZero-Flash recovers most of the 4-step performance using only 1 denoising step.


5.2. Model and Data Ablations
We conduct ablations to isolate the contributions of data diversity, model scale, and architecture. Due to
computational constraints, all ablation models are trained with 50K steps and batch size 32, and evaluated on
PnP Easy tasks for consistent comparison.

                               Architecture                Model Size            Data           Task Progress
                            Q1. Data Diversity
                              DreamZero (AR)                    14B            Repetitive         33% ± 4.2%
                              DreamZero (AR)                    14B             Diverse           50% ± 6.3%
                            Q2. Model Scale
                              DreamZero (AR)                     5B             Diverse           21% ± 4.2%
                              DreamZero (AR)                    14B             Diverse           50% ± 6.3%
                              VLA                                5B             Diverse            0% ± 0.0%
                              VLA                               14B             Diverse            0% ± 0.0%
                            Q3. Architecture (Bidirectional vs. AR)
                              DreamZero (BD)                14B                 Diverse          50% ± 14.4%
                              DreamZero (AR)                14B                 Diverse          50% ± 6.3%

Table 4: Model and Data Ablations. Task progress on PnP Easy tasks (± standard error). AR = autoregressive,
BD = bidirectional. All models trained with 50K steps and batch size 32.

  12 In this specific post-training experiment, we only utilized 11 short, global language annotations unique for each task. We hypothesize

diversifying the language can also enable stronger tranfer, but leave further investigation to future work.




                                                                                                                                        17
                                     World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



Q1. Does data diversity improve generalization?
We compare DreamZero trained on 500 hours of diverse data versus 500 hours of repetitive data, where
the latter contains 70 tasks with many repeated demonstrations per task using similar object positions and
configurations. As shown in Table 4, diverse data substantially improves generalization (33% → 50%), even on
simple pick-and-place tasks. We hypothesize this reflects WAMs’ learning dynamics: since video prediction
is largely inherited from pretraining, the key challenge is learning inverse dynamics. A robust IDM requires
diverse state-action correspondences across varied contexts, which repetitive data inherently lacks.

Q2. Does WAM performance scale with model size?
For VLAs, scaling model size improves semantic reasoning but not necessarily action prediction. We find that
WAMs exhibit clearer scaling behavior: the 14B model significantly outperforms the 5B model (50% vs. 21%),
with the smaller model prone to visual hallucinations that propagate to erroneous actions.

To ensure fair comparison, we also scale VLA baselines to match DreamZero’s size by initializing from 8B and
32B pretrained VLMs (Yang et al., 2025), truncating to the first half of the transformer blocks, and attaching
DiT-based action modules following Bjorck et al. (2025). As shown in Table 4, larger VLAs still fail to learn
from diverse data (0% task progress), often hovering near objects without making contact. This suggests that
scaling model capacity alone does not address VLAs’ difficulty with diverse data distributions.

Q3. Does autoregressive architecture outperform bidirectional?
We compare DreamZero’s autoregressive (AR) architecture against a bidirectional (BD) variant. While task
progress is similar (Table 4), the AR model produces substantially smoother motions—backpropagating through
entire action sequences enables better temporal consistency. Additionally, AR inference is 3–4× faster due to
KV caching.


6. Discussion and Future Work
Scaling Laws of WAMs. We have identified that leveraging larger video backbone model and training on
diverse data boosts downstream performance in Table 4. However, we still have lacking evidence for scaling
laws for robot foundation models, specifically for WAMs. Similar to scaling laws for language models (Kaplan
et al., 2020), scaling laws for WAMs depending on the model size, dataset size, and the training compute need
to be explored to determine the optimal configuration to extract the maximal capability of WAMs. We expect
that the tendency of scaling WAMs to be different from VLAs, showing a more direct scaling law for actions.
We leave deep investigation on scaling laws for WAMs as future work.

Learning from In-the-wild Human Data. Although we have investigated leveraging egocentric human data to
boost the performance on unseen tasks (Section 5), our experiments are still constrained to small scale in-lab
data (only 12 minutes). Recently, a large amount of human video data has been released that has more diverse
distribution compared to robot data (Chen et al., 2026; Grauman et al., 2022; Hoque et al., 2025). Since WAMs
are pretrained on diverse internet video data, we hypothesize that leveraging large-scale egocentric human
video data that are related to robot manipulation tasks would lead to stronger transfer to downstream robot
tasks compared to current VLAs. We leave this direction as future work.

Faster Inference. Through model and system optimizations, we enable DreamZero to run at 7Hz using 2
GB200s. However, compared to current VLAs which runs up to over 20Hz on consumer GPUs, DreamZero
is still computationally expensive due the large parameter size and the iterative denoising nature of video
models. In the future, if smaller video backbone models also have strong generalization capability, WAMs could
potentially be utilized as a real-time System 1 model on a lightweight edge device.

Long-horizon Reasoning. Current DreamZero architecture functions primarily as a System 1 model.
Although DreamZero has a concept of visual memory, it is currently short-horizon (6 seconds). Robust
long-horizon execution will require either a System 2 planner or WAMs with significantly extended context


                                                                                                           18
                                     World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



windows. For the former, both modular dual-system architectures (Shi et al., 2025) and unified approaches
(Deng et al., 2025) offer promising directions. For the latter, techniques from video-based world models
that maintain coherent generation over extended horizons (Ball et al., 2025; HunyuanWorld, 2025) could be
adapted to expand WAM context length.

High-Precision Tasks. While DreamZero generalizes broadly across tasks and environments, it inherits
limitations common to behavior cloning on tasks requiring sub-centimeter precision, such as key insertion
or fine assembly. Our diverse pretraining strategy prioritizes breadth, which may underrepresent the dense
demonstrations needed for these high-precision manipulation. That said, recent work (Kim et al., 2026) showed
promising results that WAMs may actually hold an advantage for high-precision manipulation tasks with
millimeter tolerance, an encouraging signal that the trade-off between broad generalization and fine-grained
dexterity may be reconcilable with further investigation.

Embodiment Design for WAMs. We hypothesize two key factors will shape the best robot embodiments for
future WAM development: (1) Degrees of freedom: Higher-DOF robots will require more play data to learn an
accurate implicit IDM, as the mapping from visual futures to motor commands grows combinatorially with
kinematic complexity. Quantifying the accuracy of implicit IDMs remains a challenge. (2) Human similarity:
Embodiments that more closely resemble humans—particularly humanoids with dexterous manipulation
capabilities—may transfer more efficiently despite higher DOF, as they can leverage both the motion priors
from video pretraining and the massive scale of human egocentric videos. These factors pull in opposite
directions—yet human-like embodiments may win out by trading mechanical simplicity for access to web-scale
human data—the fuel for next-generation robot foundation models.


7. Acknowledgment
This work would not have been possible without our incredible robot operators: Alec Nagal, Inho Rha, Ava
Yazdanfar, Sally Huynh, Rachit Deo, Alaa Eltayeb, Andres Rocha, Brian Dang, Cher Choi, Cristaldo Campos,
Ethan Sushil Dhilpe, Jeremy Chimienti, Leilee Naderi, Manish Shah, Manoj Hallegere, Nick Aguilar, Paul
Truong, Rahul Sampagaon, Shreya Raj, Nadia Laswi, Amitoj Sandhu, Omkaar Buddhikot, and Wesley Durbano.
We also thank Pranav Atreya for their support on integrating DreamZero-Droid into RoboArena Benchmark.
We also thank Danyi Chen, Ming-Yu Liu, and Spencer Huang for their continuous support, and Nishanth Kumar,
KR Zentner, Fernando Castaneda Garcia-Rozas, Zhengyi Luo, Yunfan Jiang, and Max Li for fruitful discussions.




                                                                                                          19
                                       World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



A. Comparison with Alternative World Model Architectures
The term “world model” encompasses a broad family of approaches beyond video-based prediction. Here we
discuss how WAMs differ from these alternatives.

Latent-Space World Models. Joint Embedding Predictive Architectures (JEPAs) (Assran et al., 2023, 2025;
Bardes et al., 2024; LeCun, 2022) predict future states in abstract latent spaces rather than pixel space,
offering computational efficiency and the ability to discard unpredictable details. V-JEPA 2 (Assran et al., 2025)
demonstrates this approach on robotics, achieving zero-shot planning on manipulation tasks after post-training
on 62 hours of robot data. Similarly, the Dreamer series (Hafner et al., 2019, 2020, 2023, 2025) learns
compact latent dynamics models for model-based reinforcement learning. However, these approaches model
dynamics as 𝑝(𝑠𝑡+1 |𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )—predicting next state conditioned on current state and action—and thus require
goal-conditioned planning or search at test time to yield trajectories.

3D Point Cloud World Models. PointWorld (Huang et al., 2025) unifies state and action in a shared 3D spatial
domain, predicting scene dynamics as 3D point flows conditioned on robot actions. This formulation enables
embodiment-agnostic learning and real-time integration with model-predictive control (MPC). However, like
latent world models, it requires explicit optimization (e.g., MPPI sampling) at inference to generate action
trajectories.

Key Distinction. These alternative approaches share a common characteristic: they model forward dynamics
and require separate inverse dynamics models or explicit planning/search procedures at deployment. In
contrast, WAMs jointly model 𝑝(o𝑡:𝑡+𝐻 , a𝑡:𝑡+𝐻 |o0:𝑡 , c), directly producing action trajectories aligned with
predicted visual futures without test-time optimization. This enables real-time closed-loop control at 7Hz—a
frequency that would be challenging for search-based methods—while inheriting rich spatiotemporal priors
from video pretraining.


B. Bidirectional vs. Autoregressive WAMs

                                                                 **Sampling Point**
                 T=0                                                    T=20                            T=30



                              Put the black objects into the drawer and close the drawer.


                                         Mismatch                                   Video Subsampling




     Bidirectional                        ...                         ...



                                                                               Action Sampling   Mismatch




                                      Video Context
                                            Context                            Video Sampling




    Autorgressive                         ...                         ...



                                                                               Action Sampling




Figure 13: Bidirectional vs. Autoregressive WAMs. When the sampling point falls mid-task (T=20), bidirec-
tional WAMs must subsample video to align with the language caption, distorting native FPS and degrading
video-action alignment. Autoregressive WAMs avoid this trade-off by conditioning on video context, preserving
both language-video correspondence and native frame rate.



                                                                                                               20
                                               World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



Figure 13 illustrates a key challenge for bidirectional WAMs when training closed-loop systems. Given a language
annotation in a given long-horizon demonstration, the model must learn that the instruction corresponds to
a specific video interval. In bidirectional architectures, without subsampling, the model receives a language
instruction (e.g., ’put the black objects into the drawer’) but usually generates video covering only a fraction of
the task interval, causing the language to describe actions not yet visible in the predicted frames. This mismatch
leads to significant language-following degradation, as measured via an internal video prediction benchmark.

A natural solution is to subsample the video to match the task caption interval. However, this creates a new
problem for closed-loop training: we need the model to receive observations from arbitrary points within a
task—not just the beginning. When the sampling point falls mid-task (e.g., T=20 in Figure 13), subsampling
distorts the native FPS, making video-action alignment substantially harder to learn.

Autoregressive WAMs can sidestep this dilemma. By conditioning on video context rather than subsampling,
they preserve both the language-video correspondence and the native frame rate, enabling tight alignment
across all three modalities: language, video, and action.


C. Model and Training details
                C0   Z1   Y1     C1    Z2     Y2    C2    Z3   Y3           C0   Z1    Y1    C1     Z2    Y2    C2     Z3      Y3


           C0                                                          Z1



           Z1                                                          Y1



           Y1                                                          Z2



           C1                                                          Y2



           Z2                                                          Z3


           Y2                                                          Y3


           C2
                                                                                                                : self-attention
           Z3                                                                                                   : KV-cache

           Y3


                          (a) Attention mask (Training)                               (b) Attention mask (Inference)


Figure 14: Attention startegy of DreamZero. (a) QKV Self-Attention mask for DreamZero training. Y-axis
shows the Query (Q) and X-axis shows the Key/Value (KV). Given conditioning frames (C0, C1, C2), we train
the model to predict the velocities of next frames (Z1, Z2, Z3) and actions (Y1, Y2, Y3). (b) During inference,
we compute the KV-cache of conditional frames and concatenate them to predict the action and frames. For
example, Y3 (action) is able to attend to C0, C1, and C2, taking into account previous visual observations as
history to predict the current actions during both training and inference. Note that the C0, C1, and C2 during
inference is replaced with the GT observations.

We visualize the attention mask for training and inference in Figure 14. For DreamZero, we set each chunk
as 𝐾 = 2 latent frames. From preliminary results, we have observed that 𝐾 = 2 outperforms 𝐾 = 1 empirically.
We set the number of chunks 𝑀 = 4 by default. If the trajectory length is shorter than 𝑀 = 4, 𝑀 can be smaller
than 4. For Agibot training data, the video is sampled at 5FPS ratio and action is sampled at 30Hz. We use the
action horizon of 𝐻 = 48. Therefore, the video and action span 1.6 seconds per chunk. For DROID training, the
video is sampled at 5FPS ratio and action is sampled at 15Hz. We use the action horizon of 𝐻 = 24. Therefore,
same as Agibot, the video and action span 1.6 seconds per chunk. The maximum context length is 8 latent
frames (4x2), which is equivalent to 33 raw frames, spanning 6.6 seconds. We leave increasing the visual
context for WAMs as future work.




                                                                                                                                    21
                                              World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies




Algorithm 1 DreamZero Training (Flow Matching)                       Algorithm 2 DreamZero Inference (Closed-Loop
 1: Input: Dataset 𝒟, Text condition c
                                                                     Control)
 2: Hyperparams: Number of chunks 𝑀                                    1: Input: Instruction c, Initial Image oinit , State qinit
 3: Model: u𝜃 (Joint Video-Action DiT)                                 2: Hyperparams: Steps 𝑁 , Cache Thresh 𝜖
 4: while not converged do                                             3: Init: 𝒦𝒱 ← ∅, vprev ← ∅, qcurr ← qinit
 5:   Sample trajectory 𝜏 ∼ 𝒟                                          4: // 1. Prefill Cache (Context Phase, 𝑡 = 0)
 6:   Encode video to clean latents z1:𝑀
                                     1   , normalize                   5: zinit ← VAE(oinit )
    actions a1:𝑀
               1                                                       6: // Pass clean video, no action/state
 7:     Split 𝜏 into 𝑀 chunks                                          7: (·, ·, 𝒦𝒱) ← u𝜃 ([zinit , ∅]; 𝒦𝒱, c, ∅,
 8:     for 𝑘 = 1, . . . , 𝑀 do ◁ Chunk-wise Training                                             𝑡 = 0, update=True)
 9:         Define clean context 𝒞𝑘 ← {(z𝑗1 , a𝑗1 )}𝑘−1     𝑗=1 ◁
                                                                      8: // 2. Autoregressive Loop
    TF History                                                        9: while task not done do
10:         Sample timestep 𝑡𝑘 ∼ 𝒰(0, 1)                             10:    Sample x0 = [z0 , a0 ] ∼ 𝒩 (0, I)               ◁ Noise at
11:         // Optional: DreamZero-Flash Decoupling                      𝑡=0
12:         if Flash Mode then                                       11:    // Joint Denoising (Flow Matching 𝑡 : 0 → 1)
13:              𝑡𝑣𝑖𝑑 ∼ Beta(7, 1), 𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑡 ∼ 𝒰(0, 1)                   12:    for 𝑖 = 0 . . . 𝑁 − 1 do
14:         else                                                     13:         𝑡𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖+1 ← Scheduler(𝑖, 𝑁 )
15:              𝑡𝑣𝑖𝑑 ← 𝑡𝑘 , 𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑡 ← 𝑡𝑘                               14:         // Optimization: DiT Caching
16:         end if                                                   15:         if vprev ̸= ∅ and CosSim(vprev , vlast ) > 𝜖
17:         Sample noise z𝑘0 , a𝑘0 ∼ 𝒩 (0, I)                            then
18:         Interpolate (Eq. 2):                                     16:               v𝑖 ← vprev
19:            z𝑘𝑡 ← 𝑡𝑣𝑖𝑑 z𝑘1 + (1 − 𝑡𝑣𝑖𝑑 )z𝑘0                       17:         else
20:            a𝑘𝑡 ← 𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑡 a𝑘1 + (1 − 𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑡 )a𝑘0                       18:               (v𝑖vid , v𝑖act , ·) ← u𝜃 (x𝑡𝑖 ; 𝒦𝒱, c, qcurr ,
21:         Predict velocity:                                                                         𝑡𝑖 , update=False)
22:            v𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 ← u𝜃 ([z𝑘𝑡 , a𝑘𝑡 ]; 𝒞𝑘 , c, q𝑘 , 𝑡𝑘 )           19:               v𝑖 ← [v𝑖vid , v𝑖act ]
23:         Target vel. v𝑘 := [z𝑘1 , a𝑘1 ] − [z𝑘0 , a𝑘0 ]            20:               vprev ← v𝑖
24:         Loss ℒ ← ||v𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 − v𝑘 ||2                     ◁ Eq. 3    21:         end if
25:         Update 𝜃 ← 𝜃 − 𝜂∇ℒ                                       22:         // Solver Step
26:     end for                                                      23:         x𝑡𝑖+1 ← x𝑡𝑖 + Step(v𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖 , 𝑡𝑖+1 )
27: end while                                                        24:    end for
                                                                     25:    // 3. Execution & Cache Update
                                                                     26:    a ← Filter(xaction
                                                                            ^                   1      )        ◁ Clean Action 𝑡 = 1
                                                                     27:    Async Execute ^          a on Robot
                                                                     28:    // Critical: Inject Ground Truth (𝑡 = 0)
                                                                     29:    Real observation oreal , qreal
                                                                     30:    qcurr ← qreal , zreal ← VAE(oreal )
                                                                     31:    (·, ·, 𝒦𝒱) ← u𝜃 ([zreal , ∅]; 𝒦𝒱, c, ∅,
                                                                                                      𝑡 = 0, update=True)
                                                                     32:    *Discard predicted video latent from x1
                                                                     33: end while



D. Real-time Execution Details
This appendix provides additional details on the system-, implementation-, and model-level optimizations
introduced in Section 3.2.

D.1. System-level Optimizations
CFG Parallelism. To address the computation bottleneck inherent to DiT, we employed Classifier-Free Guidance
(CFG) parallelism. Standard CFG requires two distinct model evaluations—the conditional and unconditional
forward passes—which are typically executed sequentially. We parallelized these operations by distributing the
conditioned and null-conditioned score estimations across two independent GPUs. This effectively reduced the
latency per diffusion step by nearly half, with no impact on overall model quality.



                                                                                                                                   22
                                     World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



DiT Caching. The iterative nature of DiT inference imposes a significant computational bottleneck for real-
time applications. Previous efforts have focused on training-free caching techniques that exploit temporal
redundancies across diffusion steps. TeaCache (Liu et al., 2024) leverages the relative 𝐿1 difference between
timestep-embedding modulated inputs as a heuristic to estimate output variance and skip redundant com-
putations, while TaylorSeer (Liu et al., 2025) employs higher-order Taylor expansions to extrapolate future
latent states from historical derivatives. In DreamZero, we implement a caching mechanism that exploits the
directional consistency of velocity vectors learned during flow matching.

During inference, the model tracks cosine similarity between successive velocity predictions. When this metric
exceeds a predefined threshold (𝜏 ), the model bypasses the DiT forward pass for a window of a few steps
by reusing the cached velocity vector. This adaptive scheduling concentrates computational resources on
critical trajectory updates, reducing the average number of DiT steps from 16 to 4 with minimal degradation to
predicted video and action fidelity.

Asynchronous Execution. Sequential execution of action blocks introduces stalls while waiting for upstream
models to produce the next chunk, making the robot more open-loop and less reactive to real-time state
changes, especially with large chunk sizes. We use an asynchronous execution mechanism that decouples
model inference from action execution, allowing both stages to run concurrently. The motion controller always
executes the most recent action scheduled for the current timestamp, while the inference module always uses
the latest observation.

D.2. Implementation-level Optimizations
Torch Compile and CUDA Graphs. Inference is predominantly CPU-bound due to kernel launch overheads
and Python execution. We employ torch.compile with CUDA Graphs (mode="reduce-overhead") and enforce
full graph capture (fullgraph=True) to eliminate graph breaks. In addition to reducing CPU overhead,
torch.compile decreases memory bandwidth requirements through operator fusion. We apply compilation
to five model components: the diffusion transformer, scheduler, text encoder, image encoder, and VAE. We
enforce static shapes (dynamic=False), which results in multiple recompilations during the first inference
trajectory due to the evolving KV cache shape. From the second trajectory onward, inference proceeds without
recompilation. To enable error-free compilation, we refactor the model to follow a functional programming
paradigm: the KV cache is passed explicitly as input and returned as output of the compiled function.

Post-Training Quantization. We implement a mixed-precision strategy using the NVIDIA Model Optimizer
(NVIDIA Corporation, 2024) on Blackwell (SM100) architecture. We quantize model weights and activations
to NVFP4 (E2M1) while maintaining sensitive QKV projections and Softmax operations in FP8 (E4M3). To
preserve numerical stability, we employ FP16 accumulation for non-linear operations including LayerNorm and
RoPE. This configuration improves latency with negligible impact on generated video and action quality.

Kernel-Level Enhancements. We use the cuDNN backend for dot-product attention via PyTorch Scaled
Dot-Product Attention (SDPA), requiring PyTorch version ≥2.9. Earlier versions of the Transformer Engine
library may also access these efficient cuDNN kernels.

Scheduler Optimizations. The initial Flow UniPC scheduler (Zhao et al., 2023) implementation required CPU
execution for several operations, causing frequent CPU–GPU synchronization and GPU stalls. We migrated
these operations to GPU, eliminating unnecessary CPU overhead.

D.3. Model-level Optimizations — DreamZero-Flash
In the standard DreamZero formulation, video and action modalities share the same denoising timestep 𝑡𝑘 :

                                      𝑡video
                                       𝑘     = 𝑡action
                                                𝑘      = 𝑡𝑘 ,   𝑡𝑘 ∼ 𝒰(0, 1)                              (4)



                                                                                                           23
                                           World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



DreamZero-Flash decouples these schedules by biasing video timesteps toward lower values (higher noise)
while keeping action timesteps uniform:

                                 𝑡video
                                  𝑘     = 1 − 𝜂,       𝜂 ∼ Beta(𝛼, 𝛽),        𝑡action
                                                                               𝑘      ∼ 𝒰(0, 1)                  (5)

where 𝛼 > 𝛽 (e.g., 𝛼 = 7, 𝛽 = 1). Since Beta(𝛼, 𝛽) with 𝛼 > 𝛽 concentrates mass near 𝜂 ≈ 1, the transformed
variable 𝑡video
          𝑘     = 1 − 𝜂 is biased toward 0, corresponding to high-noise video states. The noisy samples become:

                      z𝑘𝑡video = 𝑡video
                                  𝑘     z𝑘1 + (1 − 𝑡video
                                                    𝑘     )z𝑘0 ,   a𝑘𝑡action = 𝑡action
                                                                                𝑘      a𝑘1 + (1 − 𝑡action
                                                                                                   𝑘      )a𝑘0   (6)
                        𝑘                                            𝑘




For Beta(7, 1), E[𝜂] = 0.875, yielding E[𝑡video
                                          𝑘     ] = 0.125 compared to 0.5 in the coupled setting. This exposes
the model during training to configurations where actions must be predicted from predominantly noisy visual
context (Figure 5), aligning training with rapid-action-denoising inference where actions denoise from noise
level 1 → 0 in one step while video remains partially noisy.

Action Chunk Smoothing. Generated action chunks may contain high-frequency noise from denoising. We
apply filtering to ensure stable real-world behavior: first upsampling the action chunk to 2× resolution via
cubic interpolation, then applying a Savitzky-Golay filter (window size 21, polynomial order 3) to suppress
noise while preserving trajectory shape, and finally downsampling to original resolution.


E. AgiBot Diverse Data Collection Strategy
Our data collection philosophy prioritizes diversity over repetition. Unlike conventional approaches that collect
hundreds of demonstrations per task in controlled lab settings, we collect data across 22 real-world environ-
ments spanning homes, restaurants, supermarkets, coffee shops, offices, warehouses, laboratories, and hotels
(Figure 15).

E.1. Daily Collection Workflow
Each day, teleoperators receive a printed task sheet listing available tasks for their assigned area (e.g., kitchen
area, checkout counter). For each episode, they select three tasks (usually very coarse-grained like “tidy
up") from this sheet and execute them consecutively. Each task typically requires 1–2 minutes, resulting in
approximately 5-minute episodes.

At the end of each day, teleoperators log the frequency count for each task. Once a task was collected in 50
episodes, it is deprecated and removed from the task sheet. Teleoperators are incentivized to propose new tasks,
which they inevitably must do as existing tasks become deprecated. This mechanism continuously expands the
task distribution throughout data collection, yielding a long-tail of diverse behaviors.

Because we prioritize utility over repetition, our tasks are naturally more coarse-grained than typical robot
learning datasets. Examples include organizing items, ground garbage cleaning, shopping basket return, toy
box tidying, table tidying, and clothes hanging—but the full set grows organically as the collection progresses.

E.2. Multi-Task Episode Structure
The three-task episode structure serves two purposes: it maximizes diversity within each episode and encourages
the model to learn smooth task transitions. For example, a single episode might involve (1) clearing dishes
from a table, (2) wiping the table surface, and (3) organizing condiments. This design yields an average of 42
subtasks per episode (Figure 6), significantly more than typical single-task datasets.

This combination of environment diversity, task deprecation with forced expansion, and multi-task episodes
produces a heterogeneous dataset that differs substantially from conventional robot learning corpora. Rather



                                                                                                                 24
                                      World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies




Figure 15: Data Collection Environments. We collect teleoperation data across 22 diverse real-world environ-
ments, including offices, laboratories, restaurants, supermarkets, coffee shops, warehouses, homes, hotels, and
retail stores. This diversity enables DreamZero to generalize to unseen environments without task-specific
fine-tuning.


than learning narrow task-specific policies, DreamZero learns generalizable skills that transfer across envi-
ronments and tasks. See https://dreamzero0.github.io/training_data_gallery/ for examples of these
coarse-grained tasks (the videos shown in the website concatenated each coarse-grained tasks)


F. AgiBot Evaluation Details
We provide the evaluation setup for both seen tasks in Tables 5 and unseen tasks in Table 6 for Agibot. Each row
shows the initial frame and instruction for 4 robots. We conduct 2 rollouts per robot for each task by varying
the objects, locations and the robot arm to use for the task (The current table mostly shows the evaluation
using the left arm).


G. DROID Evaluation Details
We provide the evaluation setup for both seen and unseen tasks in Tables 7a and 7b for DROID. We conduct 2
rollouts per task by varying the location of the objects.



                                                                                                             25
                                                                 World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies




Table 5: Seen Tasks Evaluation Setup for AgiBot G1
 Category   #      Task       Image          Instruction                 Image          Instruction                  Image         Instruction                  Image         Instruction


                                                                                                                                                                          The left arm picks up the
                                        The left arm picks up the                The left arm picks up the lime                The left arm picks up the
                                                                                                                                                                         green pear on the table and
            1    PnP Fruit               Banana on the table and                  on the table and places it on              peach on the table and places
                                                                                                                                                                            places it on the blue
                                        places it in the Blue Plate.                  the light green plate.                     it on the baking pan.
                                                                                                                                                                              checkered bowl.




                                        The left arm picks up the                  The left arm picks up the                   The left arm picks up the                 The left arm picks up the
  PnP            Taking out            Mango from the plastic bag                 yellow pear from the plastic               purple grapes from the plastic             watermelon from the plastic
  Easy      2                         and places it into the Wooden                bag and places it onto the                  bag and places it into the                bag and places it onto the
                   Fruit
                                                  Basket                                   blue tray.                                brown basket.                              Blue Plate.




                 Wipe the             The left arm uses a sponge to                The left arm used a black                 The left arm uses a napkin to                The left arm used a paper
            3                          wipe the coffee spill off the                cloth to wipe the white                  wipe the creamer spill off the              towel to wipe the water off
                  Mess                            table.                             powder off the table.                               table.                                    the table.




                    PnP               The left arm picks up the Pink                The left arm picks up the                The left arm picks up the light              The left arm picks up the
            4                         Fork from the table and places             orange fork from the table and               blue fork from the table and              green fork from the table and
                 Fork/Spoon               it onto the blue plate.                  places it into the glass cup              places it onto the orange plate             places it into the blue plate.




                                                                                   The left arm picked up the                 The left arm picked up the                 The left arm picked up the
                 Put Pen in           The left arm picks up the Red
                                                                                  black marker from the table                 white marker pen from the                  mechanical pencil from the
PnP         5                         Marker pen from the table and
                                                                                   and placed it into the pen                 table and placed it into the               table and placed it into the
                  Holder              placed it into the pen holder.
Hard                                                                                         holder.                                  pen holder.                                pen holder.




                 Put Cup on           The left arm picks up the clear              The left arm picks up the                   The left arm picks up the                The left arm picks up the pink
            6                         cup from the table and places              plastic cup from the table and              plastic cup from the table and             cup from the table and places
                  Coaster                 it on the grey coaster.                 places it on the blue coaster.             places it on the white coaster.                it on the gray coaster.




                                                                                 The robot reaches its left arm              The robot reaches its left arm             The robot reaches its left arm
                                      The robot reaches to grip the
                                                                                 to grip the blue plate, moves it            to grip the paper bowl, moves              to grip the pink bowl, moves it
                                       green bowl, moves it to the
                                                                                 to the middle light green plate,            it over the middle white bowl,               over the middle beige bowl,
                Stack                   middle wooden bowl, and
                                                                                 and releases it to stack. It then              and releases it to stack. It               and releases it to stack. It
            7                           releases it to stack. It then
                                                                                  reaches its right arm to grip                then reaches its left arm to               then reaches its left arm to
              Bowls/Cups              reaches to grip the white bowl,
                                                                                   the red plate, moves it over              grip the blue checkered bowl,               grip the white bowl, moves it
                                      moves it to the same location,
                                                                                 the middle stack of plates, and              moves it over the stack, and              over the stack, and releases it
                                      and releases it onto the stack.
                                                                                  releases it to finish the task.             releases it to finish the task.                    onto the stack.


                                       Both arms grip the bottom of
                                                                                  Both arms fold the bottom of                Both arms fold the bottom of              Both arms fold the bottom of
                                      the light grey short sleeve and
                                                                                  the green short sleeve to the                the logo short sleeve to the              the gray short sleeve to the
                                          fold it toward the middle.
                                                                                    middle. They then pull the                  middle. They then pull the                middle. They then pull the
                                      They then pull the short sleeve
                  Folding                                                         shirt toward the edge of the                shirt toward the edge of the              shirt toward the edge of the
                                         across the table to the edge.
            8                         Next, both arms grasp the top
                                                                                 table. Next, both arms fold the             table. Next, both arms fold the             table. Next, both arms fold
                   Shirts                                                          top of the shirt down to the                top of the shirt down to the              the top of the shirt down to
                                      of the shirt and fold it down to
                                                                                 middle. Finally, the right arm              middle. Finally, the right arm              the middle. Finally, the left
                                        the middle. Finally, the right
                                                                                  grasps the collar and folds it              grasps the collar and folds it              arm grasps the collar and
                                      arm grips the collar and folds
                                                                                   down to complete the task.                  down to complete the task.                  folds it down to finish.
                                       it down to complete the task.



                                      Both arms fold the bottom of               Both arms fold the bottom of                Both arms fold the bottom of               Both arms fold the bottom of
                                        the tan shorts toward the                  the grey shorts toward the                the white shorts toward the                the green shorts toward the
 Contact          Folding             middle. Then, the right arm                middle. Then, the right arm                 middle. Then, the right arm                middle. Then, the right arm
  Rich      9                         folds the shorts in half from              folds the shorts in half from               folds the shorts in half from              folds the shorts in half from
                  Shorts
                                       right to left to complete the              right to left to complete the               right to left to complete the              right to left to complete the
                                                    fold.                                      fold.                                       task.                                      fold.




                  Stacking             Both arms pick up the black               Both arms pick up the white                  Both arms pick up the black                Both arms pick up the dark
            10                        shirt and place it on the stack            shirt and place it on the gray                hoodie and place it on the               gray shirt and place it on the
                  Clothes                       of clothes.                                  towel.                                 stack of clothes.                         stack of clothes.




                                                                                                                                                                                                   26
                                                            World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies




Table 6: Unseen Tasks Evaluation Setup for AgiBot G1

#      Task      Image          Instruction                   Image            Instruction                  Image          Instruction                 Image          Instruction

                                                                                                                     The robot coordinates both                 The robot coordinates both
                           The robot coordinates both
                                                                        The robot reaches its left arm              arms to simultaneously grasp               arms to simultaneously grasp
                         arms to simultaneously grasp
                                                                        to grasp the blue box and hold               the two loops of the knot of               the two loops of the knot of
       Untie             the two loops of the shoelace.
                                                                         it steady. It then reaches its              the box. It then moves both                 the package. It then moves
1                           It then moves both arms
                                                                          right arm toward the blue                        arms outward in                          both arms outward in
     Shoelaces              outward in synchronized,
                                                                         ribbon and moves it to untie                  synchronized, opposing                      synchronized, opposing
                          opposing directions until the
                                                                                    the knot.                       directions until the knot of the           directions until the knot of the
                             shoelace is fully untied.
                                                                                                                          box is fully untied.                     package is fully untied.




                           The robot reaches its right                  The robot reaches its left arm              The robot reaches its left arm             The robot reaches its left arm
     Remove                arm to gasp the crown and                    to grasp the hat and lifts it to            to grasp the hat and lifts it to           to grasp the hat and lifts it to
2                         lifts it to remove it from the                      remove it from the                          remove it from the                         remove it from the
     /Put Hat
                                mannequin’s head.                            mannequin’s head.                           mannequin’s head.                          mannequin’s head.




                                                                          The robot reaches its right               The robot reaches its left arm               The robot reaches its right
                         The robot reaches its left arm
      Draw                                                              arm to pick up the marker and                to pick up the black marker               arm to pick up the marker and
                         to pick up the red marker and
3                        the left arm moves the marker
                                                                         the right arm draws a circle                and the left arm moves the                   the right arm moves the
      Circle                                                             on the whiteboard with the                 marker to draw a circle on the              marker to draw a llne on the
                          to draw a circle on the book.
                                                                                    marker.                                     paper                                   whiteboard.




     Take out            The left arm holds the cup on                  The left arm holds the cup on               The left arm holds the cup on               The right arm holds the cup
4                        the table. Then the right arm                  the table. Then the right arm               the table. Then the right arm              on the table.Then the left arm
      Straw              pulls the straw out of the cup.                pulls the straw out of the cup.             pulls the straw out of the cup.            pulls the straw out of the cup.




                                                                                                                                                                The robot reaches its right
                           The robot reaches its right                                                                The robot reaches its right
                                                                           The robot reaches its right                                                         arm to pick up the red cube,
                         arm to pick up the green cube,                                                             arm to pick up the white cube,
                                                                          arm to pick up the red cube,                                                          moves it over the blue cube,
                           moves it over the red cube,                                                              moves it over the green cube,
                                                                           moves it over the colorful                                                           and releases it to begin the
       Cube                and releases it to stack. It                                                                and releases it to stack. It
                                                                         cube, and releases it to stack.                                                       stack. It then reaches its left
5                         then reaches its right arm to
                                                                        It then reaches its right arm to
                                                                                                                      then reaches its left arm to
                                                                                                                                                                 arm to pick up the orange
     Stacking               pick up the yellow cube,                                                                pick up the blue cube, moves
                                                                        pick up the green cube, moves                                                          cube, moves it over the stack,
                          moves it over the stack, and                                                              it over the stack, and releases
                                                                            it over the red cube, and                                                           and releases it onto the red
                         releases it onto the green cube                                                               it onto the white cube to
                                                                         releases it to finish the tower.                                                          cube to complete the
                                to finish the task.                                                                          finish the task.
                                                                                                                                                                    three-tier structure.




                         The left arm grabs the brush.                  The right arm grabs the brush.              The left arm grabs the brush.              The right arm grabs the brush.
6    Painting            Then left arm paints with the                   Then right arm paints with                 Then left arm paints with the               Then right arm paints with
                            brush on the notebook                          the brush on the paper                      brush on the notebook                    the brush on the notebook




                                                                         The robot reaches its right
                         The robot reaches its left arm                                                             The robot reaches its left arm             The robot reaches its left arm
                                                                         arm to grasp the iron and
7     Ironing            to grasp the iron and moves it
                                                                         moves it across the shirt to
                                                                                                                    to grasp the iron and moves it             to grasp the iron and moves it
                           across the shorts to iron it.                                                               across the shirt to iron it.               across the shirt to iron it.
                                                                                   iron it.




                           The right arm of the robot                                                                                                          The left arm of the robot grasp
      Shake                 grasp the human hand to                                                                                                               the human hand to shake
                                                                        The left arm shakes the hand                The right arm shakes the hand
8                        shake hands. It then initiates a
                                                                         of the human up and down                    of the human up and down
                                                                                                                                                                   hands. It then initiates a
      Hands              rhythmic up-and-down motion                                                                                                           rhythmic up-and-down motion
                           to perform the handshake.                                                                                                             to perform the handshake.




                           The left arm grabs the left                    The left arm grabs the left               The right arm grabs the right              The right arm grabs the right
      Folding            side of the map. The right arm                 side of the map. The right arm              side of the map. The left arm              side of the map.The left arm
9                        folds the right side of the map.               folds the right side of the map.            folds the left side of the map.            folds the left side of the map.
      (Map)              The left arm folds the left side               The left arm folds the left side            The right arm folds the right              The right arm folds the right
                                   of the map.                                    of the map.                              side of the map.                           side of the map.




      Pulling             The robot reaches its right                                                                The robot reaches its right               The robot reaches its left arm
                                                                        The robot reaches its left arm
10                        arm to grasp the cart and
                                                                        to grasp the cart and pulls it.
                                                                                                                     arm to grasp the cart and                 to grasp the cart and pulls it
       Cart                        pulls it.                                                                                  pulls it.                                  forward.




                                                                                                                                                                                           27
                                                               World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



(a) Seen tasks on DROID                                                                             (b) Tasks with unseen verbs on DROID
#    Image           Instruction                  #    Image            Instruction                 #    Image          Instruction                 #    Image           Instruction


              Move the cup forward then put                     Move the bowl on the left to the                 Orient the mug so the handle is
1               the marker inside the cup
                                                  11                right side of the table.
                                                                                                    1                      to the right
                                                                                                                                                    11             Hook the hat onto the tripod




                                                                 Pick up the pencil and put it on                                                                 Pinch the binder clip to release
2             Put the marker in the blue box      12                        the bowl
                                                                                                    2                    Fan the burger             12                      the papers




              Remove the pair of gloves from
                                                                Pick the marker up from the table                                                                 Withdraw the bread from the
3            the open drawer and put it on the 13
                                                                      and put it in the bowl
                                                                                                    3             Slice the bread with the knife    13            toaster and place on the plate
                          table




4                Put the marker on table          14            Place the bowl next to the marker   4               Type ’hi’ on the keyboard       14           Cinch the drawstring of the bag




             Pick up the apple and put it in the                                                                                                                  Dispense the mustard onto the
5                          basket
                                                 15              Remove a lemon from the bowl       5            Extricate the straw from the cup   15                       bread




6             Put the towel on the white cup      16               Move the grapes to the left      6            Reveal the object under the cup    16            Bake the croissant in the oven




                                                                                                                    Match the objects to their                   Fry the vegetables in the pan with
7                Put the towel in the pan         17            Move the green grapes backwards     7                                               17
                                                                                                                      corresponding bowl                                    the spatula




8                                                 18                                                             Maneuver the blocks through the
                 Put the hat on the table                        Put the bread inside the toaster   8                   matching hole
                                                                                                                                                 18              Depress the lever on the toaster




              Put the pair of scissors into the                    Push the lever on the bread                                                                    Elevate the yellow block to the
9                         drawer
                                                  19                   toaster downwards            9              Affix the magnet to the tray     19                   highest platform




                                                                 Pick up the cup from the bowl                                                                   Weave the wire through the holes
10              Put the towel in the basket       20              and put it in the other cups      10           Combine the nuts and batteries     20                     of the box




H. Failure Case Analysis
In Figure 16, we illustrate the generated video by DreamZero and execution rollout for both AgiBot and
DROID. Overall, the robot execution follows the visual plan generated on the video modality side. For AgiBot
video generated by DreamZero, the robot picks up the marker with left arm and passes the marker to the
right arm. Consistent with the generated video, for the execution rollout, the robot picks up the top part
of the marker, but instead of drawing a line on the whiteboard, the left arm passes the marker to the right
arm. For DROID video generated by DreamZero, the robot picks up the bread instead of opening the oven
first. Aligned with the generated video, for the execution rollout, the robot picks up the bread first instead of
opening the oven, leading to the rollout being stuck after the robot has reached to the oven with bread held.
This implies that improving the language following and visual planning capability of WAMs could potentially
lead to better action execution.




                                                                                                                                                                                               28
                                     World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies




                                Pick up the marker and draw a line on the whiteboard.

 Generated


  Execution


                                             Bake the croissant in the oven

 Generated


  Execution



Figure 16: Illustration of generated and executed pair. We illustrate the generated video and action execution
pair. These two examples show scenarios where the video prediction failed and the robot followed the failed
plan. DreamZero failed to generate video of the Agibot G1 robot drawing in the whiteboard and failed to
generate video of the Franka robot opening the oven first.




                                                                                                           29
                                     World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



 References
 [1] Michael S Albergo, Nicholas M Boffi, and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Stochastic interpolants: A unifying
     framework for flows and diffusions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08797, 2023. 7

 [2] Arslan Ali, Junjie Bai, Maciej Bala, Yogesh Balaji, Aaron Blakeman, Tiffany Cai, Jiaxin Cao, Tianshi Cao,
     Elizabeth Cha, Yu-Wei Chao, et al. World simulation with video foundation models for physical ai. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2511.00062, 2025. 7

 [3] Mahmoud Assran, Quentin Duval, Ishan Misra, Piotr Bojanowski, Pascal Vincent, Michael Rabbat, Yann
     LeCun, and Nicolas Ballas. Self-supervised learning from images with a joint-embedding predictive
     architecture. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
     20

 [4] Mido Assran, Adrien Bardes, David Fan, Quentin Garrido, Russell Howes, Mojtaba Komeili, Matthew
     Muckley, Ammar Rizvi, Claire Roberts, Koustuv Sinha, et al. V-JEPA 2: Self-supervised video models
     enable understanding, prediction and planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09985, 2025. 5, 20

 [5] Philip J. Ball, Jakob Bauer, Frank Belletti, Bethanie Brownfield, Ariel Ephrat, Shlomi Fruchter, Agrim
     Gupta, Kristian Holsheimer, Aleksander Holynski, Jiri Hron, Christos Kaplanis, Marjorie Limont, Matt
     McGill, Yanko Oliveira, Jack Parker-Holder, Frank Perbet, Guy Scully, Jeremy Shar, Stephen Spencer,
     Omer Tov, Ruben Villegas, Emma Wang, Jessica Yung, Cip Baetu, Jordi Berbel, David Bridson, Jake Bruce,
     Gavin Buttimore, Sarah Chakera, Bilva Chandra, Paul Collins, Alex Cullum, Bogdan Damoc, Vibha Dasagi,
     Maxime Gazeau, Charles Gbadamosi, Woohyun Han, Ed Hirst, Ashyana Kachra, Lucie Kerley, Kristian
     Kjems, Eva Knoepfel, Vika Koriakin, Jessica Lo, Cong Lu, Zeb Mehring, Alex Moufarek, Henna Nandwani,
     Valeria Oliveira, Fabio Pardo, Jane Park, Andrew Pierson, Ben Poole, Helen Ran, Tim Salimans, Manuel
     Sanchez, Igor Saprykin, Amy Shen, Sailesh Sidhwani, Duncan Smith, Joe Stanton, Hamish Tomlinson,
     Dimple Vijaykumar, Luyu Wang, Piers Wingfield, Nat Wong, Keyang Xu, Christopher Yew, Nick Young,
     Vadim Zubov, Douglas Eck, Dumitru Erhan, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, Zoubin Gharamani,
     Raia Hadsell, Aäron van den Oord, Inbar Mosseri, Adrian Bolton, Satinder Singh, and Tim Rocktäschel.
     Genie 3: A new frontier for world models. 2025. URL https://deepmind.google/discover/blog/
     genie-3-a-new-frontier-for-world-models/. 19

 [6] Adrien Bardes, Quentin Garrido, Jean Ponce, Michael Rabbat, Yann LeCun, Mahmoud Assran, and Nicolas
     Ballas. V-JEPA: Video joint embedding predictive architecture. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05065, 2024. 20

 [7] Jose Barreiros, Andrew Beaulieu, Aditya Bhat, Rick Cory, Eric Cousineau, Hongkai Dai, Ching-Hsin Fang,
     Kunimatsu Hashimoto, Muhammad Zubair Irshad, Masha Itkina, et al. A careful examination of large
     behavior models for multitask dexterous manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05331, 2025. 13

 [8] Homanga Bharadhwaj, Debidatta Dwibedi, Abhinav Gupta, Shubham Tulsiani, Carl Doersch, Ted Xiao,
     Dhruv Shah, Fei Xia, Dorsa Sadigh, and Sean Kirmani. Gen2act: Human video generation in novel
     scenarios enables generalizable robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16283, 2024. 5

 [9] Johan Bjorck, Fernando Castañeda, Nikita Cherniadev, Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi Fan, Yu Fang, Dieter
     Fox, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, et al. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid
     robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14734, 2025. 2, 4, 10, 18

[10] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy
     Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. 𝜋0 : A vision-language-action flow model for general robot
     control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164, 2024. 4

[11] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy
     Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. 𝜋0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot
     control. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2410.24164, 2024. 2


                                                                                                           30
                                      World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



[12] Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx, Michael S
     Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportunities and risks of
     foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021. 4

[13] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn, Keerthana
     Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Tomas
     Jackson, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal,
     Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Utsav Malla, Deeksha Manjunath, Igor Mordatch, Ofir Nachum,
     Carolina Parada, Jodilyn Peralta, Emily Perez, Karl Pertsch, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Michael
     Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi, Kevin Sayed, Jaspiar Singh, Sumedh Sontakke, Austin Stone,
     Clayton Tan, Huong Tran, Vincent Vanhoucke, Steve Vega, Quan Vuong, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu,
     Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and Brianna Zitkovich. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale.
     In arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022. 4

[14] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski,
     Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, Pete Florence, Chuyuan Fu, Montse Gonzalez
     Arenas, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Kehang Han, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Brian Ichter,
     Alex Irpan, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Lisa Lee, Tsang-
     Wei Edward Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Henryk Michalewski, Igor Mordatch, Karl Pertsch, Kanishka Rao,
     Krista Reymann, Michael Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi, Pierre Sermanet, Jaspiar Singh, Anikait
     Singh, Radu Soricut, Huong Tran, Vincent Vanhoucke, Quan Vuong, Ayzaan Wahid, Stefan Welker, Paul
     Wohlhart, Jialin Wu, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and Brianna Zitkovich. Rt-2: Vision-
     language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818,
     2023. 2, 4

[15] Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho, Julian
     Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic
     affordances. In Conference on robot learning, pages 287–318. PMLR, 2023. 4

[16] Qingwen Bu, Yanting Yang, Jisong Cai, Shenyuan Gao, Guanghui Ren, Maoqing Yao, Ping Luo, and
     Hongyang Li. Univla: Learning to act anywhere with task-centric latent actions. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2505.06111, 2025. 4

[17] Chi-Lam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Ya Jing, Tao Kong, Hang Li, Yifeng Li, Yuxiao Liu, Hongtao Wu,
     Jiafeng Xu, Yichu Yang, et al. Gr-2: A generative video-language-action model with web-scale knowledge
     for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06158, 2024. 5

[18] Boyuan Chen, Zhuo Xu, Sean Kirmani, Brain Ichter, Dorsa Sadigh, Leonidas Guibas, and Fei Xia. Spa-
     tialvlm: Endowing vision-language models with spatial reasoning capabilities. In Proceedings of the
     IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 14455–14465, 2024. 2

[19] Boyuan Chen, Tianyuan Zhang, Haoran Geng, Kiwhan Song, Caiyi Zhang, Peihao Li, William T Freeman,
     Jitendra Malik, Pieter Abbeel, Russ Tedrake, et al. Large video planner enables generalizable robot control.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.15840, 2025. 5

[20] Delong Chen, Tejaswi Kasarla, Yejin Bang, Mustafa Shukor, Willy Chung, Jade Yu, Allen Bolourchi,
     Theo Moutakanni, and Pascale Fung. Action100m: A large-scale video action dataset. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2601.10592, 2026. 18

[21] Chaorui Deng, Deyao Zhu, Kunchang Li, Chenhui Gou, Feng Li, Zeyu Wang, Shu Zhong, Weihao Yu,
     Xiaonan Nie, Ziang Song, et al. Emerging properties in unified multimodal pretraining. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2505.14683, 2025. 19



                                                                                                              31
                                     World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



[22] Kamil Dreczkowski, Pietro Vitiello, Vitalis Vosylius, and Edward Johns. Learning a thousand tasks in a
     day. Science Robotics, 10(108):eadv7594, 2025. 4

[23] Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan
     Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language
     model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023. 4

[24] Yilun Du, Sherry Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Josh Tenenbaum, Dale Schuurmans, and Pieter
     Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. Advances in neural information
     processing systems, 36:9156–9172, 2023. 5

[25] Yilun Du, Sherry Yang, Pete Florence, Fei Xia, Ayzaan Wahid, brian ichter, Pierre Sermanet, Tianhe Yu,
     Pieter Abbeel, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Andy Zeng, and Jonathan Tompson. Video
     language planning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
     https://openreview.net/forum?id=9pKtcJcMP3. 5

[26] Zhiyuan Feng, Zhaolu Kang, Qijie Wang, Zhiying Du, Jiongrui Yan, Shubin Shi, Chengbo Yuan, Huizhi
     Liang, Yu Deng, Qixiu Li, et al. Seeing across views: Benchmarking spatial reasoning of vision-language
     models in robotic scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.19400, 2025. 2

[27] Jensen Gao, Suneel Belkhale, Sudeep Dasari, Ashwin Balakrishna, Dhruv Shah, and Dorsa Sadigh. A
     taxonomy for evaluating generalist robot policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01238, 2025. 4

[28] Kaifeng Gao, Jiaxin Shi, Hanwang Zhang, Chunping Wang, Jun Xiao, and Long Chen. Ca2-vdm: Ef-
     ficient autoregressive video diffusion model with causal generation and cache sharing. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2411.16375, 2024. 7

[29] Gemini Robotics Team. Gemini robotics: Bringing ai into the physical world.               arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2503.20020, 2025. 2, 4, 5

[30] Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit Girdhar,
     Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours of
     egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
     2022. 18

[31] Pranav Guruprasad, Yangyue Wang, Sudipta Chowdhury, Harshvardhan Sikka, and Paul Pu Liang. Bench-
     marking vision, language, & action models in procedurally generated, open ended action environments.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05540, 2025. 2

[32] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
     behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019. 5, 20

[33] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with discrete
     world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02193, 2020. 5, 20

[34] Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains through
     world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023. 5, 20

[35] Danijar Hafner, Wilson Yan, and Timothy Lillicrap. Training agents inside of scalable world models, 2025.
     URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.24527. 20

[36] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598,
     2022. 8

[37] Ryan Hoque, Peide Huang, David J Yoon, Mouli Sivapurapu, and Jian Zhang. Egodex: Learning dexterous
     manipulation from large-scale egocentric video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11709, 2025. 18


                                                                                                           32
                                     World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



[38] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu
     Chen, et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR, 1(2):3, 2022. 11

[39] Yucheng Hu, Yanjiang Guo, Pengchao Wang, Xiaoyu Chen, Yen-Jen Wang, Jianke Zhang, Koushil Sreenath,
     Chaochao Lu, and Jianyu Chen. Video prediction policy: A generalist robot policy with predictive visual
     representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14803, 2024. 5

[40] Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
     Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
     planning with language models. In 6th Annual Conference on Robot Learning. 4

[41] Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Ruohan Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Voxposer: Composable
     3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05973, 2023. 4

[42] Wenlong Huang, Yu-Wei Chao, Arsalan Mousavian, Ming-Yu Liu, Dieter Fox, Kaichun Mo, and Li Fei-
     Fei. Pointworld: Scaling 3d world models for in-the-wild robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2601.03782, 2025. 20

[43] Xun Huang, Zhengqi Li, Guande He, Mingyuan Zhou, and Eli Shechtman. Self forcing: Bridging the
     train-test gap in autoregressive video diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08009, 2025. 8

[44] Team HunyuanWorld. Hy-world 1.5: A systematic framework for interactive world modeling with
     real-time latency and geometric consistency. arXiv preprint, 2025. 19

[45] Arhan Jain, Mingtong Zhang, Kanav Arora, William Chen, Marcel Torne, Muhammad Zubair Irshad,
     Sergey Zakharov, Yue Wang, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, et al. Polaris: Scalable real-to-sim evaluations
     for generalist robot policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16881, 2025. 11

[46] Joel Jang, Seonghyeon Ye, Zongyu Lin, Jiannan Xiang, Johan Bjorck, Yu Fang, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer
     Huang, Kaushil Kundalia, Yen-Chen Lin, Loïc Magne, Ajay Mandlekar, Avnish Narayan, You Liang Tan,
     Guanzhi Wang, Jing Wang, Qi Wang, Yinzhen Xu, Xiaohui Zeng, Kaiyuan Zheng, Ruijie Zheng, Ming-Yu
     Liu, Luke Zettlemoyer, Dieter Fox, Jan Kautz, Scott Reed, Yuke Zhu, and Linxi Fan. Dreamgen: Unlocking
     generalization in robot learning through video world models. In 9th Annual Conference on Robot Learning,
     2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=3CnxNqmklv. 5

[47] Yang Jin, Zhicheng Sun, Ningyuan Li, Kun Xu, Hao Jiang, Nan Zhuang, Quzhe Huang, Yang Song, Yadong
     Mu, and Zhouchen Lin. Pyramidal flow matching for efficient video generative modeling. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2410.05954, 2024. 7

[48] Leslie Pack Kaelbling and Tomás Lozano-Pérez. 1 rationally engineering rational robots. 4

[49] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray,
     Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2001.08361, 2020. 18

[50] Simar Kareer, Karl Pertsch, James Darpinian, Judy Hoffman, Danfei Xu, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
     and Suraj Nair. Emergence of human to robot transfer in vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2512.22414, 2025. 16

[51] Alexander Khazatsky, Karl Pertsch, Suraj Nair, Ashwin Balakrishna, Sudeep Dasari, Siddharth Karamcheti,
     Soroush Nasiriany, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Kirsty Ellis, et al. Droid: A large-scale
     in-the-wild robot manipulation dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12945, 2024. 10, 11




                                                                                                           33
                                      World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



[52] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael
     Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Thomas Kollar, Benjamin Burchfiel,
     Russ Tedrake, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Openvla: An open-source
     vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024. 4

[53] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael
     Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action
     model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024. 2

[54] Moo Jin Kim, Yihuai Gao, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yen-Chen Lin, Yunhao Ge, Grace Lam, Percy Liang, Shuran Song,
     Ming-Yu Liu, Chelsea Finn, et al. Cosmos policy: Fine-tuning video models for visuomotor control and
     planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.16163, 2026. 2, 5, 7, 19

[55] Po-Chen Ko, Jiayuan Mao, Yilun Du, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Learning to act from
     actionless videos through dense correspondences. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Mhb5fpA1T0. 5

[56] Nishanth Kumar, William Shen, Fabio Ramos, Dieter Fox, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, Leslie Pack Kaelbling,
     and Caelan Reed Garrett. Open-world task and motion planning via vision-language model generated
     constraints. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, pages 1–8, 2026. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2026.3656799. 4

[57] Yann LeCun. A path towards autonomous machine intelligence. Open Review, 2022. 20

[58] Jason Lee, Jiafei Duan, Haoquan Fang, Yuquan Deng, Shuo Liu, Boyang Li, Bohan Fang, Jieyu Zhang,
     Yi Ru Wang, Sangho Lee, et al. Molmoact: Action reasoning models that can reason in space. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2508.07917, 2025. 4

[59] Lin Li, Qihang Zhang, Yiming Luo, Shuai Yang, Ruilin Wang, Fei Han, Mingrui Yu, Zelin Gao, Nan
     Xue, Xing Zhu, Yujun Shen, and Yinghao Xu. Causal world modeling for robot control. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2601.21998, 2026. 7

[60] Shuang Li, Yihuai Gao, Dorsa Sadigh, and Shuran Song. Unified video action model. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2503.00200, 2025. 5, 7

[61] Yi Li, Yuquan Deng, Jesse Zhang, Joel Jang, Marius Memmel, Raymond Yu, Caelan Reed Garrett, Fabio
     Ramos, Dieter Fox, Anqi Li, et al. Hamster: Hierarchical action models for open-world robot manipulation.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05485, 2025. 4

[62] Junbang Liang, Ruoshi Liu, Ege Ozguroglu, Sruthi Sudhakar, Achal Dave, Pavel Tokmakov, Shuran Song,
     and Carl Vondrick. Dreamitate: Real-world visuomotor policy learning via video generation. In 8th
     Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=InT87E5sr4. 5

[63] Junbang Liang, Pavel Tokmakov, Ruoshi Liu, Sruthi Sudhakar, Paarth Shah, Rares Ambrus, and Carl
     Vondrick. Video generators are robot policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.00795, 2025. 2, 5

[64] Yue Liao, Pengfei Zhou, Siyuan Huang, Donglin Yang, Shengcong Chen, Yuxin Jiang, Yue Hu, Jingbin Cai,
     Si Liu, Jianlan Luo, et al. Genie envisioner: A unified world foundation platform for robotic manipulation.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05635, 2025. 3, 5, 7

[65] Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching for
     generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747, 2022. 7

[66] Feng Liu, Shiwei Zhang, Xiaofeng Wang, Yujie Wei, Haonan Qiu, Yuzhong Zhao, Yingya Zhang, Qixiang
     Ye, and Fang Wan. Timestep embedding tells: It’s time to cache for video diffusion model. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2411.19108, 2024. 23


                                                                                                             34
                                      World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



[67] Jiacheng Liu, Chang Zou, Yuanhuiyi Lyu, Junjie Chen, and Linfeng Zhang. From reusing to forecasting:
     Accelerating diffusion models with taylorseers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06923, 2025. 23

[68] Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and Qiang Liu. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer
     data with rectified flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.03003, 2022. 7

[69] Calvin Luo, Zilai Zeng, Yilun Du, and Chen Sun. Solving new tasks by adapting internet video knowledge.
     In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. 5

[70] NVIDIA Corporation.         Nvidia model-optimizer, 2024.                 URL https://github.com/NVIDIA/
     Model-Optimizer. 23

[71] Jonas Pai, Liam Achenbach, Victoriano Montesinos, Benedek Forrai, Oier Mees, and Elvis Nava. mimic-
     video: Video-action models for generalizable robot control beyond vlas. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.15692,
     2025. 2, 3, 5, 7

[72] Physical Intelligence. 𝜋0.5 : a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2504.16054, 2025. 4, 5, 10

[73] Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Brian Ichter, Michael Equi, Liyiming Ke, Karl Pertsch, Quan Vuong, James Tanner,
     Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Niccolo Fusai, et al. Hi robot: Open-ended instruction following with
     hierarchical vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19417, 2025. 19

[74] Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter Fox,
     Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using large
     language models. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2023. 4

[75] Generalist AI Team. Gen-0: Embodied foundation models that scale with physical interaction. Generalist
     AI Blog, 2025. https://generalistai.com/blog/preview-uqlxvb-bb.html. 16

[76] Team Wan. Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models. 2025. 2, 7, 11

[77] Hansi Teng, Hongyu Jia, Lei Sun, Lingzhi Li, Maolin Li, Mingqiu Tang, Shuai Han, Tianning Zhang,
     WQ Zhang, Weifeng Luo, et al. Magi-1: Autoregressive video generation at scale. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2505.13211, 2025. 7, 8

[78] Homer Walke, Kevin Black, Abraham Lee, Moo Jin Kim, Max Du, Chongyi Zheng, Tony Zhao, Philippe
     Hansen-Estruch, Quan Vuong, Andre He, Vivek Myers, Kuan Fang, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine.
     Bridgedata v2: A dataset for robot learning at scale. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2023. 10

[79] John Won, Kyungmin Lee, Huiwon Jang, Dongyoung Kim, and Jinwoo Shin. Dual-stream diffusion for
     world-model augmented vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.27607, 2025. 5

[80] Hongtao Wu, Ya Jing, Chilam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Jiafeng Xu, Xinghang Li, Minghuan Liu, Hang
     Li, and Tao Kong. Unleashing large-scale video generative pre-training for visual robot manipulation. In
     The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
     forum?id=NxoFmGgWC9. 5

[81] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao,
     Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388, 2025. 18

[82] Jianwei Yang, Reuben Tan, Qianhui Wu, Ruijie Zheng, Baolin Peng, Yongyuan Liang, Yu Gu, Mu Cai,
     Seonghyeon Ye, Joel Jang, Yuquan Deng, Lars Liden, and Jianfeng Gao. Magma: A foundation model for
     multimodal AI agents, 2025. 4



                                                                                                             35
                                      World Action Models are Zero-shot Policies



[83] Sherry Yang, Yilun Du, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Jonathan Tompson, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Dale
     Schuurmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning interactive real-world simulators. In The Twelfth International
     Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=sFyTZEqmUY.
     5

[84] Seonghyeon Ye, Joel Jang, Byeongguk Jeon, Se June Joo, Jianwei Yang, Baolin Peng, Ajay Mandlekar,
     Reuben Tan, Yu-Wei Chao, Bill Yuchen Lin, Lars Liden, Kimin Lee, Jianfeng Gao, Luke Zettlemoyer, Dieter
     Fox, and Minjoon Seo. Latent action pretraining from videos. In The Thirteenth International Conference
     on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=VYOe2eBQeh. 4

[85] Tianwei Yin, Qiang Zhang, Richard Zhang, William T Freeman, Fredo Durand, Eli Shechtman, and Xun
     Huang. From slow bidirectional to fast autoregressive video diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
     Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pages 22963–22974, 2025. 8

[86] Qingqing Zhao, Yao Lu, Moo Jin Kim, Zipeng Fu, Zhuoyang Zhang, Yecheng Wu, Zhaoshuo Li, Qianli
     Ma, Song Han, Chelsea Finn, et al. Cot-vla: Visual chain-of-thought reasoning for vision-language-action
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.22020, 2025. 5

[87] Wenliang Zhao, Lujia Bai, Yongming Rao, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. UniPC: A unified predictor-corrector
     framework for fast sampling of diffusion models. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=hrkmlPhp1u. 23

[88] Ruijie Zheng, Yongyuan Liang, Shuaiyi Huang, Jianfeng Gao, Hal Daumé III, Andrey Kolobov, Furong
     Huang, and Jianwei Yang. TraceVLA: Visual trace prompting enhances spatial-temporal awareness for
     generalist robotic policies. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. 4

[89] Ruijie Zheng, Jing Wang, Scott Reed, Johan Bjorck, Yu Fang, Fengyuan Hu, Joel Jang, Kaushil Kundalia,
     Zongyu Lin, Loic Magne, et al. Flare: Robot learning with implicit world modeling. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2505.15659, 2025. 5

[90] Jiaming Zhou, Ke Ye, Jiayi Liu, Teli Ma, Zifan Wang, Ronghe Qiu, Kun-Yu Lin, Zhilin Zhao, and Junwei
     Liang. Exploring the limits of vision-language-action manipulations in cross-task generalization. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2505.15660, 2025. 2

[91] Siyuan Zhou, Yilun Du, Jiaben Chen, Yandong Li, Dit-Yan Yeung, and Chuang Gan. Robodreamer:
     Learning compositional world models for robot imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12377, 2024. 5

[92] Chuning Zhu, Raymond Yu, Siyuan Feng, Benjamin Burchfiel, Paarth Shah, and Abhishek Gupta. Unified
     world models: Coupling video and action diffusion for pretraining on large robotic datasets. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2504.02792, 2025. 5, 7




                                                                                                              36
