                                        Track2Act: Predicting Point Tracks from Internet
                                        Videos enables Generalizable Robot Manipulation

                                              Homanga Bharadhwaj1 , Roozbeh Mottaghi2,∗ , Abhinav Gupta1,∗ , and
                                                                    Shubham Tulsiani1,∗
                                                           1
                                                               Carnegie Mellon University and 2 FAIR at Meta
arXiv:2405.01527v2 [cs.RO] 8 Aug 2024




                                                Abstract. We seek to learn a generalizable goal-conditioned policy that
                                                enables diverse robot manipulation — interacting with unseen objects
                                                in novel scenes without test-time adaptation. While typical approaches
                                                rely on a large amount of demonstration data for such generalization,
                                                we propose an approach that leverages web videos to predict plausi-
                                                ble interaction plans and learns a task-agnostic transformation to ob-
                                                tain robot actions in the real world. Our framework, Track2Act pre-
                                                dicts tracks of how points in an image should move in future time-steps
                                                based on a goal, and can be trained with diverse videos on the web
                                                including those of humans and robots manipulating everyday objects.
                                                We use these 2D track predictions to infer a sequence of rigid trans-
                                                forms of the object to be manipulated, and obtain robot end-effector
                                                poses that can be executed in an open-loop manner. We then refine this
                                                open-loop plan by predicting residual actions through a closed loop pol-
                                                icy trained with a few embodiment-specific demonstrations. We show
                                                that this approach of combining scalably learned track prediction with a
                                                residual policy requiring minimal in-domain robot-specific data enables
                                                diverse generalizable robot manipulation, and present a wide array of
                                                real-world robot manipulation results across unseen tasks, objects, and
                                                scenes. https://homangab.github.io/track2act/ 1

                                                Keywords: Diverse Generalizable Manipulation · Web Videos




                                        1     Introduction

                                        Robots that can be reliably deployed out-of-the-box in new scenarios have the
                                        potential for helping humans in everyday tasks. To realize this vision of gener-
                                        alizable robot manipulation, it is crucial to develop direct execution capabilities
                                        i.e. being able to execute a task out-of-the-box without requiring any test-time
                                        training through demonstrations or self-practice before solving a specified task.
                                        This is an important desiderata for the system to be repeatedly usable with-
                                        out any downtime, and safe to work alongside humans without performing any
                                        exploratory actions. We pursue the goal of developing such directly executable
                                        1 ∗
                                              equal contribution. Correspondence to Homanga B. hbharadh@cs.cmu.edu
2       H. Bharadhwaj et al.




Fig. 1: Glimpse of some of the diverse robot manipulation capabilities across physical
office and kitchen scenes enabled by our framework. We learn to predict point tracks
from web videos for learning interaction plans that can be used for inferring robot
actions in unseen scenarios. This enables a common goal-conditioned policy to perform
everyday tasks like closing microwaves, pulling out drawers, flipping open toasters,
pouring from jars etc. Columns show first and last images of rollouts from our policy.


robot manipulation systems that can perform a broad set of everyday tasks. In
addition to being deployable directly, to be widely accessible, we aim to make
the robot manipulators generalizable to diverse offices, and kitchens in the real
world.
    Developing such directly executable manipulation capabilities has been at-
tempted by prior works, through behavior cloning on robot interaction datasets [5,
8,28,73]. While this approach is in-principle scalable with data, collecting diverse
real-world robot interaction data is challenging due to operational constraints.
Indeed, recent works that have attempted to scale robot datasets, including
cross-robot and cross-domain datasets [5, 15, 46] still suffer from task diversity
issues and are mostly restricted to lab-like structured scenarios. Instead of learn-
ing a single-policy that can be directly deployed, some recent works aimed at
in-the-wild deployment have adopted the method of test-time training [2, 40].
They require either a video of a human performing the task [2] followed by on-
line exploration, or a demo through a robot end-effector held by a human [40].
These approaches are not very convenient for diverse deployments because they
require a human to solve the task first, and several hours after that for the robot
to learn how to solve that exact task in the exact scene. Thus, such approaches
are not directly deployable for new tasks in new scenes.
    Our insight to develop an in-the-wild manipulation strategy that is also di-
rectly deployable is to factorize a manipulation policy into an interaction-plan
that can leverage diverse large-scale video sources on the web of humans and
robots manipulating everyday objects and a residual policy that requires a small
amount of embodiment-specific robot interaction data. Such a factorized struc-
ture is inspired by prior works (e.g. [4]), however, unlike hand-object masks
in [4], we instantiate this interaction-plan in an embodiment agnostic-manner
by predicting how points in an image of the initial scene move in future frames.
                                                                     Track2Act         3

This choice of an interaction-plan is more expressive compared to hand-object
masks adopted by Bharadhwaj et al. [4], as it directly captures point correspon-
dences across time, while at the same time being easier to compute than full
RGB frames [14]. Given an initial image of the scene, a goal image defining
the task to be performed, and a random set of points in the initial image, we
define the interaction plan to be a 2D trajectory of the locations of the points
in future frames, such that the goal is achieved. Importantly, we can train this
model purely from the abundantly available human and robot videos on the web
without any data specific to the deployment robot embodiment, by using off-
the-shelf point-tracking approaches [29] for generating the ground-truth point
trajectories. For deployment in a robot’s environment, we can convert the 2D
interaction-plan to a sequence of 3D end-effector poses, by having a depth image
of the initial scene as an additional input and solving an optimization problem
to obtain rigid transforms of the object being manipulated. Finally, with a small
amount of embodiment-specific robot interaction data for different tasks (∼ 400
trajectories overall), we can learn a goal-conditioned residual policy that cor-
rects for errors in the predicted plan at each time-step and allows for closed-loop
deployment.
    In summary, we develop Track2Act with the following contributions:

 – We develop a framework for predicting embodiment-agnostic interaction-
   plans in the form of point tracks from diverse web videos.
 – We show how the interaction-plan prediction model can be used for obtaining
   3D rigid transforms in a robot’s environment for direct manipulation without
   using any robot data or online exploration.
 – Given a few (∼ 400) embodiment-specific task demonstrations, we show
   how to learn a goal-conditioned residual policy that can correct for errors in
   the predicted plan at each time-step. The interaction-plan prediction model
   combined with the residual policy correction can then be used for closed-loop
   deployment for new tasks in new scenes.

    Our real-world robot manipulation results with a Spot robot (highlighted in
Fig. 1) show broad generalization across diverse tasks involving unseen objects in
unseen scenes, and demonstrate the potential for leveraging easily available pas-
sive videos on the web for learning embodiment-agnostic interaction plans. This
is significant as it enables robot manipulation with a common goal-conditioned
policy, that generalizes to unseen tasks without requiring collection of large scale
in-domain manipulation datasets.


2    Related Works
Understanding interactions from videos. Several computer vision methods
have investigated deciphering interactions between hands and objects across var-
ious daily activities through curation of large-scale video datasets [10, 11, 21, 22,
35, 55, 59], hand pose estimation [1, 6, 18, 24, 27, 34, 37, 53, 58, 72], object pose es-
timation [25, 26, 31, 52, 64], interaction hotspot/grasp prediction [7, 20, 38, 43, 44].
4         H. Bharadhwaj et al.




                                                 Depth
                                                 of


    Initial and Goal Images   Track Prediction           Rigid Transform Prediction   Residual Policy Correction
                                                         Open-Loop Execution



Fig. 2: Illustration of the pipeline for learning track prediction from web video datasets,
inferring rigid transforms of objects based on the predicted tracks in a robot’s envi-
ronment, and fine-tuning with a residual policy learned with limited robot data. This
approach allows us to learn a single goal-conditioned policy for diverse (unseen) tasks.

Some approaches have investigated generating videos given a description of the
task, and often conditioned on a scene [14, 23, 68, 69]. Other works have at-
tempted understanding generic videos by identifying visual correspondences be-
tween frames [19, 36]. Recent approaches have made significant advances on this
problem by developing general-purpose video tracking systems that can track
points specified in a frame, across other frames in the video [13, 29]. Our track
prediction model is inspired by these developments, and is based on leveraging
the video tracking approaches to generate ground-truth tracks from web videos,
and training a model to predict future points tracks given an initial image and
a goal.
Learning Visual Representations for Manipulation.Visual imitation is
a promising technique for generalizable robot manipulation [16, 42, 70]. Recent
works that have scaled this approach for learning large-scale models for manipu-
lation require extremely high number of expert robot trajectories, often demand-
ing years for collection [5, 8, 73], and still suffer from limited generalization to
unseen scenarios for novel objects. Going beyond image observations, prior works
have also investigated structured representations like point-clouds [9, 47, 54] and
keypoints [51] for manipulation, but are restricted to tasks in structured table-
top scenarios. Some of these that predict action in the form of flow-based rep-
resentations [19, 54] require 3D datasets of robot interactions (often from simu-
lation) which constrain them from generalizable real-world deployments. More
recently, Vecerik et al. [60] use point tracking for visual servoing, and the setup
requires structured multi-stage definitions of the task and is limited to only mi-
nor test-time variations compared to training data. Concurrent work [63] that
improves upon [60] by predicting future tracks of points in the current image
can learn a policy by combining in-domain human videos with in-domain robot
videos. However, the framework is not directly amenable for leveraging web
videos because the policy relies on per-step image observations for track pre-
diction. Compared to this, and developed independently, we learn to predict
trajectories of arbitrary points from web videos given just an initial image and
a goal, we show how we can use these predicted tracks to infer rigid transforms
of objects for open-loop execution, and further improve the open-loop plan by
predicting residuals over the actions, for closed-loop deployment. This enables
                                                                    Track2Act        5

much diverse robot manipulation behaviors with a single model, that generalizes
to unseen novel objects and scenes in-the-wild.
Leveraging Non-Robot Datasets for Manipulation. One common way of
using data beyond robot interactions for efficient learning is to pre-train the
visual representations which serve as backbones for the policy models [39,41,45,
48, 65] with passive human videos [22, 30] and image data [12]. However, these
methods still crucially rely on a lot of in-domain robot data or deployment-time
training, and are restricted to learning task-specific policies. Some works that do
not require deployment-time training, go beyond visual representations and use
curated data of human videos to leverage human hand motion information [50,56]
for learning task-specific policies (instead of a single model across generic tasks).
Others that train a single policy across tasks require large in-domain perfectly
aligned human-robot data [57, 62, 66] and are not capable of leveraging web
data. Towards learning structure more directly related to manipulation from
web videos, some works try to predict visual affordances in the form of where to
interact in an image, and local information of how to interact [3,20,38,43]. While
these could serve as good initializations for a robotic policy, they are not sufficient
on their own for accomplishing tasks, and so are typically used in conjunction
with online learning, requiring several hours of deployment-time training and
robot data [2, 3]. Others learn to predict masks of hand and objects in the
scene [4] for conditional behavior cloning and are unable to leverage information
of accurate object state changes that is usually ambiguous with a mask. Our work
differs from these in terms of predicting an approximate motion of how objects
in the scene move in the future through point tracks for the entire trajectory and
is directly executable in terms of not requiring any deployment-time training.


3     Approach

We aim to develop a generalizable robot manipulation system that can scalably
leverage diverse video data for generalizable real-world manipulation. Our key
insight (Fig. 2) is to have a factorized policy for 1) learning embodiment-agnostic
interactions plans of how points in an image of a scene should move in subsequent
time-steps to realize a specified goal, followed by 2) inferring robot actions based
on the interaction plan through a residual policy. We show how this approach
allows us to generalize to diverse scenarios involving unseen tasks and objects,
since the prediction model by virtue of being trained on web data generalizes
well to new scenes, and the residual policy has a much simpler task of correcting
the robot actions derived from the interaction plan.


3.1   Overview and Setup

Given a scene specified by an RGB image I0 and a goal image G denoting
what task should be performed, we want to have a robot manipulator execute
actions a1:H in the scene to achieve the desired goal. To achieve this in unseen
scenarios, we leverage web video data by learning a model τ = Vθ (I0 , G, P0 )
6            H. Bharadhwaj et al.




Fig. 3: Architecture of the Diffusion Transformer Vθ for denoising track predictions
given initial image I0 , goal G, and an initial set of p points P0 .

Algorithm 1 Predicting Rigid Transforms from Point Tracks
 1: procedure Rigid Transforms(τ, I0 , G, P03D , K, H)
 2:    {{(xit , yti )}pi=1 }H
                            t=1 = τobj = filter(τ )                              \triangleright  Filter moving point tracks
 3:    Unknown rigid transforms [Tt ]H       t=1                                                    \triangleright  Tt has dimension 3x4
 4:    Run RANSAC on τobj to filter outliers                                                                                  \triangleright  optional
 5:    for t ← 1 to H do P
 6:       Tt = arg minTt N               i    i
                                   i (||xt − ut || + ||yt − vt ||)
                                                                     i    i

 7:       where (ut , vt , 1) ≃ KTt Pt
                         i   i
                                                     \triangleright  projections in homogeneous coordinates
 8:    return {Tt = (Rt , tt )}Tt=1



to predict future locations (tracks) of p random points P0 in the initial image.
Given a depth image for the initial frame, we leverage a subset of the predicted
tracks τobj (corresponding to moving points) to infer rigid-transforms of the
object being manipulated [Tt ]H  t=1 and show that these allow obtaining an open-
loop plan in the form of robot end-effector poses [āt ]H       t=1 . Finally, we consider
training a closed-loop residual policy πres (It , G, τ, [āt ]H
                                                              t=1 ) that corrects the open-
loop action sequence [āt ]H
                           t=1 by predicting residual actions at each timestep ∆at ,
such that the executed action sequence is [at = āt + ∆at ]H        t=1 . In the subsequent
sections, we explain the architecture and algorithm design for each of the three
stages in our approach.

3.2       Point Track Prediction from Web Videos
We instantiate track prediction as a denoising process through a DiT based
diffusion model [49]. Let I0 denote the first frame of a video, and G denote the
goal, which we consider to be the last frame of the video. For longer videos,
we obtain multiple video clips of 4-5 seconds each for training. Let there be p
points in the initial frame to be tracked, such that P0 denotes the set of those
points and let H be the prediction horizon. [Pt ]H
                                                 t=1 denotes the future locations of
those points in the subsequent time-steps that we want to predict. In the forward
diffusion process, all the points Pt are corrupted by incrementally adding noise
                                                                      Track2Act         7




Fig. 4: Architecture of the residual policy that predicts corrections at each time-step
over the predicted open-loop plan, and enables closed-loop deployment.

ϵk (k denotes the diffusion time-step), to obtain P̃t , and converging to a unit
Gaussian distribution N (0, I). New samples can be generated by reversing the
forward diffusion process, by going from Gaussian noise back to the space of
point locations. To solve the reverse diffusion process, we need to train a noise
predictor Vθ (I0 , G, P0 , k). We design a DiT Transformer based architecture [49]
for Vθ illustrated visually in Fig. 3. Different from the original DiT model, we
condition on embeddings of initial (z0 ) and goal (zg ) images in addition to that of
the diffusion step (zk ). The input to the Transformer in each batch is a sequence
of p tokens corresponding the number of points specified for tracking. The initial
P0 points are not noisy, as is the convention in training conditional diffusion
models on time-series data.
    We train the prediction model with web videos by considering variable num-
ber of initial points p that need to be tracked. For flexible modeling, the locations
of the p points are also randomized, such that at test-time any set of points in
the initial image can be specified. We do not make any assumptions on objects
to be tracked or camera motions in the videos, and do not curate the training
videos in any way apart from ensuring they are of 4-5 second duration. If the
goal image is such that multiple objects have moved from the initial scene, or
the camera has moved, the track prediction model will predict different groups
of motions for different objects and also predict motions of background points to
account for camera motion. However, for robot experiments, we consider only a
single object to be manipulated at a time, which is indeed the case with several
diverse real-world tasks.


3.3   Inferring Coarse Manipulator Trajectory from Interaction Plan

Given an image of a scene in a robot’s environment I0 , a goal G, and a random set
of points P0 in the initial image, we can use the trained track prediction model
to obtain future 2D locations of these points P̂t . As we consider scenarios with
only a single object being manipulated under a fixed camera, only a subset of
the points have a large predicted motion. We identify these p points and denote
their predicted trajectories as τobj = [{(xit , yti )}pi=1 ]H
                                                            t=1 . We consider the robot to
be equipped with an RGBD camera, so we also have depth for the points P0 in
the first frame. Let us denote these 3D points as P03D = {(xi0 , y0i , z0i )}pi=1 .
8        H. Bharadhwaj et al.

    We seek to infer a (smooth trajectory of) per-time rigid transforms Tt of the
object to be manipulated at time t relative to first frame, given 3D points in the
first frame P03D , predicted 2D trajectory of points on the object τobj , and the
camera intrinsic matrix K. As described in Algorithm 1, these can be obtained
by ensuring that the projection of the transformed 3D points i.e. KTt P0 matches
the predicted 2D tracks {(xit , yti )}pi=1 as closely as possible at each time-step t.
Let KTt P0 ≃ {(uit , vti , 1)}pi=1 . So the 2D projection of the ith point at time
t is (uit , vti ). Alternatively, we have the same coordinate for the point from the
predicted track i.e. (xit , yti ). In order to determine the rigid transforms Tt , we can
solve the optimization problem in line 6 of Algorithm 1 (e.g. with PnP solvers).
This optimization is not under-constrained because the same 3D rigid transform
Ti must explain the 2D motions of several points P0 in the initial scene. Note
that the obtained rigid transforms are embodiment-agnostic and describe how
the object should move in the scene.
    Now, to actually manipulate the object in the scene, we need to bring the
robot end-effector2 near the object, and optionally execute a grasp to hold on
to the object, followed by transforming the end-effector based on the predicted
rigid transforms [Tt ]H    t=1 . For the first step, we use a heuristic such that given
initial end-effector pose e0 we define the first transform T0 to be such that the
end-effector moves to the center of the 3D points {(xit , yti )}pi=0 with the same
orientation as e0 . After moving the end-effector to this pose e1 we execute a
grasp to hold the object. We obtain subsequent end-effector poses (open-loop
action trajectory) by applying the rigid transforms āt = Tt e1 .


3.4    Closed-loop Manipulation with Residual Policy Correction

The open-loop execution of the predicted 3D end-effector transforms described
in the last section [āt ]H
                          t=1 might fail due to small errors in the prediction. In addi-
tion, since the approach does not use any embodiment-specific data, it does not
have accurate information for reasoning about contact with objects and might
suffer from failures like being unable to grasp the object, in spite of executing the
rest of the predicted trajectory correctly. To remedy this, we propose learning
a residual policy πres (It , G, τ, [āt ]H
                                         t=1 ) shown in Fig. 4 to correct the predicted
end-effector poses in each time-step. So the end-effector pose at time t is

                  \hat {\mathbf {a}}_t = \Bar {\mathbf {a}}_t + \Delta \mathbf {a}_t \;\;;\;\;\;\text {where}\;\; \Delta \mathbf {a}_t = \pi _{\text {res}} (\mathbf {I}_t,\mathcal {G}, \mathbf {\tau },[\bar {\mathbf {a}}_t]_{t=1}^H)    (1)

Instead of predicting just a single residual action ∆at we predict residuals h
steps in the future ∆at:t+h and during deployment execute just the first action.
This multi-step prediction has been shown to mitigate compounding errors in
behavior-cloning based training [5, 71]. We can learn the residual policy with
a small amount of robot demonstrations (∼ 400 trajectories overall) of repre-
sentative tasks through behavior cloning. The data for each trajectory consists
2
    by end-effector we mean the part of the robot that interacts with an object
                                                                  Track2Act        9

of observation-action pairs of the form [(It , at )]H
                                                    t=1 . Here, It denotes images ob-
served from the robot’s camera and at denotes actions in the form of end-effector
poses.
    Crucially, since the aim of this policy is to learn only small corrections to
the predicted waypoints [āt ]H
                              t=1 , we do not need to learn this policy with data
from the exact scenarios that the system will be deployed in and the prediction
model is expected to generalize to unseen scenarios by virtue of diverse training.
The rationale is that having some embodiment-specific demonstration data in a
few scenarios will help correct for the open-loop predictions from web-only data.
For evaluation, we consider different levels of generalization with unseen object
instances and completely unseen objects in unseen scenes.

4     Experiment Setup
We focus our experiments on in-the-wild manipulation scenarios where a mobile
manipulator needs to manipulate objects in different living rooms, offices, and
kitchens based on specified goals. For all the robot experiments, we use a Boston
Dynamics Spot robot equipped with a manipulator (hand) and a front facing
Intel RealSense camera [32]. We manipulate the arm through end-effector control
based on the outputs of our policy.

4.1   Evaluation Details

Track Prediction. For quantitative evaluation of the track prediction model,
we adopt a modification of the metric developed by prior works [13, 29], δtx . For
evaluation videos, we consider the output of Co-Tracker [29] to be the ground-
truth and compare the difference with respect to the predictions, based on the
δtx metric. We define δtx to be the fraction of points that are within a threshold
pixel distance of x of their ground truth in a time-step t. We report the area
under the curve ∆ with δtx by varying x from 1 to N = 10 and taking the average
                                              PH PN
across the prediction horizon H i.e. ∆ = ( t=1 x=1 δtx )/H. Hence, ∆ can vary
from 0 to 1 with higher being better.
Track Prediction. As is the convention in goal-conditioned robot learning, we
perform evaluations by quantifying success rate, where a successful trajectory is
defined to be one where the final pose of the object in the scene to be manipulated
is identical to the pose of the object in the goal image. We categorize results based
on different levels of generalization, the definitions of which are inspired by prior
works [4, 5, 8, 73]:

 – Mild Generalization (MG): unseen configurations of seen object instances
   in seen scenes; organic scene variations like lighting and background changes
 – Standard Generalization (G): unseen object instances in seen/unseen scenes
 – Combinatorial Generalization (CG): unseen activity-object type combina-
   tions in seen/unseen scenes
 – Type Generalization (TG): completely unseen object types, or completely
   unseen activities, in unseen scenes
10      H. Bharadhwaj et al.

4.2   Baselines and Comparisons
For quantitative evaluations, we first compare our track prediction approach
with other related baselines and then perform comparisons with baselines for
robot manipulation experiments.
Track Prediction. We perform comparisons with two baselines that have the
same inputs as our track prediction model, i.e. an initial image, a goal image and
points specified on the initial image, and the same output type i.e. point tracks in
between the initial and goal images. We compare with a flow-based baseline that
directly predicts flow between the initial and goal images, and then performs a
per-timestep interpolation of the flow vectors [67]. The second baseline performs
video-infilling given initial and goal images [17], and then uses Co-Tracker [29]
to obtain tracks on the generated video.
Robot Experiments. We perform several comparisons with baselines and ab-
lation studies for goal-conditioned robot manipulation. For baselines, we use the
same embodiment-specific demonstrations as Ours, the goal-conditioned policy
that predicts residuals over open-loop actions at each time-step.
  – Goal-Conditioned BC is a baseline for multi-task policy learning, similar to
     prior works [5, 8, 73].
  – Affordance-Conditioned BC is the approach from [3] that conditions the
     policy on predicted affordances in the initial image.
  – Video-Conditioned BC based on [14, 17, 33] first predicts RGB video and
     then does tracking on top of it.
  – Hand-Object Mask Conditioned BC from [4] conditions the policy on a pre-
     dicted interaction plan consisting of masks of hands and objects.
Ours (Open Loop) is the approach for track prediction followed by open-loop ex-
ecution as described in Algorithm 1. This does not use any embodiment-specific
data for training. To understand the benefit of predicting residuals over actions
as opposed to predicting complete actions, we compare with an ablated variant
Ours (actions; not residuals) that predicts actions ât directly without predicting
residuals ∆at and not relying on an open-loop plan as input.

4.3   Training Data
For training the track prediction model, we leverage diverse passive videos avail-
able on the web that are not collected by us. Specifically, we use human video
clips from EpicKitchens [10] (clipping videos to ensure they are of 4-5 seconds
duration), and large-scale robot videos released in RT1 data [8] and Bridge-
Data [61]. To obtain ground-truth tracks for training the prediction model, we
run Co-Tracker [29] on the resulting 400,000 video clips. Note that the robot
datasets (RT1 and Bridge) are on completely different robots and scenarios than
the robot we use for experiments (Spot). For training the residual policy, the
embodiment-specific data we collect consists of ∼ 400 trajectories obtained by
tele-operating the Spot, for solving 10 tasks of manipulating everyday objects
like doors, drawers, bottles, jugs. Note that this embodiment-specific data we
collect is 3-4 orders of magnitude less than that what related works [5, 8, 73]
require for policy learning.
                                                                    Track2Act          11




Fig. 5: We show qualitative results of the track predictions on unseen initial and goal
images across diverse datasets. Given specified points on the initial image we predict
future tracks of these points, corresponding to the goal image. We can see that the
predictions are plausible and correspond to manipulating the object(s) in the scene.

5     Results
We present qualitative results of the predicted tracks, and robot evaluations,
followed by quantitative comparisons with the metrics defined in section 4.1.
Please refer to the supplementary zip for detailed qualitative results and robot
evaluation videos.

5.1   Point Track Prediction Results

Table 1: Evaluation of track prediction performance on held-out videos from different
datasets on the web. EpicKitchens [10] and SmthSmthv2 [21] are datsets of human
videos, and BridgeData [61] and RT1 data [8] are datasets of robot videos. Note that
we train a single model that we evaluate on these different datasets. The metric ∆ is
defined in section 4.1. Higher is better and the range is from 0 to 1.

             EpicKitchens [10] SmthSmthv2 [21] BridgeData [61] RT1 Data [8]
Flow [67]           0.21                 0.27                0.42               0.38
Video [17]          0.30                 0.17                  -                  -
  Ours              0.67                 0.70                0.77               0.75


    We first look at some qualitative results of the track prediction model in
different unseen scenes. In Fig. 5 we show visualization of track predictions on
unseen initial and goal images across diverse datasets. We choose points on
a grid in the initial frame, as shown in the third row. The prediction model is
conditioned on the initial image, the goal image, and the set of points in the initial
image whose future tracks are to be predicted. We can see that the predictions
12      H. Bharadhwaj et al.




Fig. 6: We show visualizations of point track predictions for different tasks, followed
by closed-loop execution with the residual policy. We can see that the predictions are
plausible and the robot execution successfully realizes the predictions to complete the
respective tasks specified by the goal images. The bottom row shows the generalization
level for each task, defined in section 4.1.

(shown in the fourth row) are plausible and correspond to manipulating the
objects in the scene as described by the respective goal images. We can also see
that when multiple entities (e.g. human and object or robot and object) or the
camera moves between the initial and goal images, there are different sets of
point tracks predicting the respective motions.
    In Table 1 we perform evaluations for track prediction by comparing with
the flow-based [67] and video-based [17] baselines. We can see that both the
baselines have much lower accuracy compared to our approach of predicting
point tracks. This is because flow is too coarse to capture large non-linear state
changes in between the initial and goal images. Whereas, predicting an RGB
video followed by tracking suffers due to issues of implausible generation because
video generation is a much more complex task than predicting the tracks of a set
of points where the details about appearance, texture etc. are abstracted out.
For reference, not predicting any movement for any point at all time-steps scores
0.03, 0.05, 0.36, 0.28. This suggests the benefit of directly predicting future point
tracks as done by our approach if the aim is to capture motion of objects in the
scene between an initial and a goal image.


5.2   Robot Manipulation Results

We visualize results of point track predictions using the trained prediction model
in a robot’s environment, followed by residual policy executions based on the pre-
dictions. In Fig. 6 we show the track predictions overlayed on the initial image,
                                                                     Track2Act        13




Fig. 7: Qualitative results showing robot executions (from a third person view) with
the residual policy for different tasks with respect to the generalization levels defined
in section 4.1. We show the first and last images of a rollout. The robot executions are
best viewed as videos in the supplementary zip.

corresponding to the goal image shown in the top row. The bottom row shows
robot execution with the first frame (1), two intermediate frames (2,3) and the
last frame (4) of a rollout. We can see that the predicted tracks correspond to
points on the object moving in a way that satisfies the goal, and the policy is
able to manipulate the object to the desired goal configuration. Since the camera
doesn’t move between the initial and goal images, we can see that background
(non object) pixels remain stationary in the predictions, which is useful for ac-
curate prediction of rigid transforms of the object.
    In Table 2 we show comparisons for robot manipulation experiments, respec-
tively for each level of generalization. We evaluate each approach for 20 rollouts
in each level, across a total of 25 tasks in 5 different physical kitchen, office,
and living room locations. We first note that our residual policy outperforms
our approach for directly executing an open-loop plan based on predicted rigid
transforms. This suggests that the residual policy is able to correct for inaccu-
racies in the open-loop plan by virtue of leveraging some embodiment-specific
data that helps in performing accurate grasps on objects and recovering from
potential failures during a trajectory.
    We observe that for mild generalization (MG), the goal-conditioned BC base-
line has slightly lower success rate compared to our residual policy, and sig-
nificantly lower (or zero) success rates for standard (G), compositional (CG),
and type (TG) generalization. This suggests the benefit of leveraging web video
data for learning interaction plans that helps our approach generalize effec-
tively. Finally, compared to baselines that also leverage web data like affordance-
conditioned BC, video-conditioned BC, and hand-object mask-conditioned BC,
we observe significant gains from our approach in the higher levels of general-
ization (CG and TG). This suggests that predicting static affordances without
reasoning about motion trajectories, hallucinating RGB videos that suffer from
incorrect generations and produce implausible artifacts in the scene, or predict-
14       H. Bharadhwaj et al.

Table 2: Evaluation of goal-conditioned robot manipulation experiments, per the pro-
tocol described in section 4.1. The numbers denote success rate averaged over 20 roll-
outs for different tasks within each generalization axis (Higher is better). Detailed list
of tasks are in the Supplementary pdf. Refer to Fig. 7 for visualizations of some task
rollouts corresponding to each of the four generalization axes.

                                                    MG         G       CG        TG
            Behavior Cloning (BC)                   60%       20%       0%        0%
           Affordance-Conditioned                   65%       30%      10%       5%
              Video-Conditioned                     60%       25%       0%        0%
       Hand-Object Mask-Conditioned                 70%       40%      25%       20%
              Ours (Open-Loop)                      35%       25%      30%       25%
     Ours (Ablation; actions not residuals)         70%       45%      30%       30%
                     Ours                           70%       60%      55%       40%
ing 2D masks of hands and objects without reasoning about correspondences
are insufficient cues for effectively leveraging web videos. Compared to these,
our interaction plan learned through track prediction provides sufficient cues for
solving unseen manipulation tasks by virtue of allowing inference of 3D rigid
transforms, and the residual policy helps correct for errors in the predictions.

5.3     Analysis of Failures
Here we discuss the failures displayed by our framework. For the open-loop plan
based on residual transforms, the main failure modes we observe are inability to
grasp the object at the right location, and inability to recover from intermediate
failures. The residual policy corrects for these behaviors by virtue of leveraging
some embodiment-specific data, and thus has higher success rates. We note that
the success rate for higher levels of generalization CG and TG) is still not very
high since these are very challenging settings and the residual policy sometimes
fails by incorrectly grasping the object, getting stuck during the execution by
trying to execute a non-feasible motion, or by executing a trajectory that does
not conform with the goal image specified.

6      Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, we developed a framework for generalizable robot manipulation by
leveraging large-scale web video data to learn embodiment agnostic plans of how
objects should be manipulated in a scene to satisfy a goal. We combined this
with a small amount of embodiment-specific data to learn residual corrections
over the predicted plans through a closed-loop policy. Our real world manipula-
tion results across a range of diverse tasks with varying levels of generalization
demonstrate the potential of scalably leveraging web data to predict plans for
object manipulation. While our framework allows for strong generalization to
unseen tasks in-the-wild, the tasks are still of short-horizon and involve ma-
nipulating a single object in the scene. It would be an interesting direction of
future work to extend our framework for tackling long-horizon tasks that involve
successive manipulations of multiple objects in the scene.
                                                                     Track2Act        15

Acknowledgement
We thank Yufei Ye, Himangi Mittal, Devendra Chaplot, Abitha Thankaraj,
Tarasha Khurana, Akash Sharma, Sally Chen, Jay Vakil, Chen Bao, Unnat Jain,
Swaminathan Gurumurthy for helpful discussions and feedback. We thank Carl
Doersch and Nikita Karaev for insightful discussions about point tracking. This
research was partially supported by a Google gift award.


References
 1. Baek, S., Kim, K.I., Kim, T.K.: Pushing the envelope for rgb-based dense 3d hand
    pose estimation via neural rendering. In: CVPR (2019)
 2. Bahl, S., Gupta, A., Pathak, D.: Human-to-robot imitation in the wild. RSS (2022)
 3. Bahl, S., Mendonca, R., Chen, L., Jain, U., Pathak, D.: Affordances from human
    videos as a versatile representation for robotics. In: CVPR (2023)
 4. Bharadhwaj, H., Gupta, A., Kumar, V., Tulsiani, S.: Towards generalizable zero-
    shot manipulation via translating human interaction plans. In: 2024 IEEE Inter-
    national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (2024)
 5. Bharadhwaj, H., Vakil, J., Sharma, M., Gupta, A., Tulsiani, S., Kumar, V.: Roboa-
    gent: Generalization and efficiency in robot manipulation via semantic augmenta-
    tions and action chunking. In: 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
    and Automation (ICRA) (2024)
 6. Boukhayma, A., Bem, R.d., Torr, P.H.: 3d hand shape and pose from images in
    the wild. In: CVPR (2019)
 7. Brahmbhatt, S., Handa, A., Hays, J., Fox, D.: Contactgrasp: Functional multi-
    finger grasp synthesis from contact. arXiv (2019)
 8. Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Dabis, J., Finn, C., Gopalakr-
    ishnan, K., Hausman, K., Herzog, A., Hsu, J., et al.: Rt-1: Robotics transformer
    for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 (2022)
 9. Byravan, A., Fox, D.: Se3-nets: Learning rigid body motion using deep neural
    networks. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
    (ICRA). pp. 173–180. IEEE (2017)
10. Damen, D., Doughty, H., Farinella, G.M., Fidler, S., Furnari, A., Kazakos, E.,
    Moltisanti, D., Munro, J., Perrett, T., Price, W., et al.: Scaling egocentric vision:
    The epic-kitchens dataset. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Com-
    puter Vision (ECCV). pp. 720–736 (2018)
11. Das, P., Xu, C., Doell, R.F., Corso, J.J.: A thousand frames in just a few words:
    Lingual description of videos through latent topics and sparse object stitching. In:
    Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
    pp. 2634–2641 (2013)
12. Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.J., Li, K., Fei-Fei, L.: Imagenet: A large-
    scale hierarchical image database. In: 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision
    and pattern recognition. pp. 248–255. Ieee (2009)
13. Doersch, C., Gupta, A., Markeeva, L., Recasens, A., Smaira, L., Aytar, Y., Carreira,
    J., Zisserman, A., Yang, Y.: Tap-vid: A benchmark for tracking any point in a video.
    Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 13610–13626 (2022)
14. Du, Y., Yang, S., Dai, B., Dai, H., Nachum, O., Tenenbaum, J., Schuurmans, D.,
    Abbeel, P.: Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. Advances
    in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024)
16      H. Bharadhwaj et al.

15. Fang, H.S., Fang, H., Tang, Z., Liu, J., Wang, J., Zhu, H., Lu, C.: Rh20t: A robotic
    dataset for learning diverse skills in one-shot. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.00595
    (2023)
16. Finn, C., Yu, T., Zhang, T., Abbeel, P., Levine, S.: One-shot visual imitation
    learning via meta-learning. In: Conference on robot learning. pp. 357–368. PMLR
    (2017)
17. Fu, T.J., Yu, L., Zhang, N., Fu, C.Y., Su, J.C., Wang, W.Y., Bell, S.: Tell me what
    happened: Unifying text-guided video completion via multimodal masked video
    generation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
    and Pattern Recognition. pp. 10681–10692 (2023)
18. Ge, L., Ren, Z., Li, Y., Xue, Z., Wang, Y., Cai, J., Yuan, J.: 3d hand shape and
    pose estimation from a single rgb image. In: CVPR (2019)
19. Goyal, A., Mousavian, A., Paxton, C., Chao, Y.W., Okorn, B., Deng, J., Fox, D.:
    Ifor: Iterative flow minimization for robotic object rearrangement. In: Proceedings
    of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp.
    14787–14797 (2022)
20. Goyal, M., Modi, S., Goyal, R., Gupta, S.: Human hands as probes for interactive
    object understanding. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
    Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 3293–3303 (2022)
21. Goyal, R., Ebrahimi Kahou, S., Michalski, V., Materzynska, J., Westphal, S., Kim,
    H., Haenel, V., Fruend, I., Yianilos, P., Mueller-Freitag, M., et al.: The" something
    something" video database for learning and evaluating visual common sense. In:
    Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. pp. 5842–
    5850 (2017)
22. Grauman, K., Westbury, A., Byrne, E., Chavis, Z., Furnari, A., Girdhar, R., Ham-
    burger, J., Jiang, H., Liu, M., Liu, X., et al.: Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000
    hours of egocentric video. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
    puter Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 18995–19012 (2022)
23. Gupta, A., Yu, L., Sohn, K., Gu, X., Hahn, M., Fei-Fei, L., Essa, I., Jiang, L.,
    Lezama, J.: Photorealistic video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2312.06662 (2023)
24. Hasson, Y., Varol, G., Tzionas, D., Kalevatykh, I., Black, M.J., Laptev, I., Schmid,
    C.: Learning joint reconstruction of hands and manipulated objects. In: CVPR
    (2019)
25. He, Y., Sun, W., Huang, H., Liu, J., Fan, H., Sun, J.: Pvn3d: A deep point-wise
    3d keypoints voting network for 6dof pose estimation. CVPR (2020)
26. Hu, Y., Hugonot, J., Fua, P., Salzmann, M.: Segmentation-driven 6d object pose
    estimation. CVPR (2019)
27. Iqbal, U., Molchanov, P., Breuel Juergen Gall, T., Kautz, J.: Hand pose estimation
    via latent 2.5 d heatmap regression. In: ECCV (2018)
28. Jang, E., Irpan, A., Khansari, M., Kappler, D., Ebert, F., Lynch, C., Levine, S.,
    Finn, C.: Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In:
    Conference on Robot Learning. pp. 991–1002. PMLR (2022)
29. Karaev, N., Rocco, I., Graham, B., Neverova, N., Vedaldi, A., Rupprecht, C.:
    Cotracker: It is better to track together. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07635 (2023)
30. Kay, W., Carreira, J., Simonyan, K., Zhang, B., Hillier, C., Vijayanarasimhan, S.,
    Viola, F., Green, T., Back, T., Natsev, P., et al.: The kinetics human action video
    dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06950 (2017)
31. Kehl, W., Manhardt, F., Tombari, F., Ilic, S., Navab, N.: Ssd-6d: Making rgb-based
    3d detection and 6d pose estimation great again. ICCV (2017)
                                                                       Track2Act        17

32. Keselman, L., Iselin Woodfill, J., Grunnet-Jepsen, A., Bhowmik, A.: Intel realsense
    stereoscopic depth cameras. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
    vision and pattern recognition workshops. pp. 1–10 (2017)
33. Ko, P.C., Mao, J., Du, Y., Sun, S.H., Tenenbaum, J.B.: Learning to act from
    actionless videos through dense correspondences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08576
    (2023)
34. Kulon, D., Guler, R.A., Kokkinos, I., Bronstein, M.M., Zafeiriou, S.: Weakly-
    supervised mesh-convolutional hand reconstruction in the wild. In: CVPR (2020)
35. Li, Y., Liu, M., Rehg, J.M.: In the eye of beholder: Joint learning of gaze and actions
    in first person video. In: Proceedings of the European conference on computer
    vision (ECCV). pp. 619–635 (2018)
36. Liu, C., Yuen, J., Torralba, A., Sivic, J., Freeman, W.T.: Sift flow: Dense cor-
    respondence across different scenes. In: Computer Vision–ECCV 2008: 10th Eu-
    ropean Conference on Computer Vision, Marseille, France, October 12-18, 2008,
    Proceedings, Part III 10. pp. 28–42. Springer (2008)
37. Liu, S., Jiang, H., Xu, J., Liu, S., Wang, X.: Semi-supervised 3d hand-object poses
    estimation with interactions in time. In: CVPR (2021)
38. Liu, S., Tripathi, S., Majumdar, S., Wang, X.: Joint hand motion and interac-
    tion hotspots prediction from egocentric videos. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
    Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 3282–3292 (2022)
39. Ma, Y.J., Sodhani, S., Jayaraman, D., Bastani, O., Kumar, V., Zhang, A.: Vip:
    Towards universal visual reward and representation via value-implicit pre-training.
    arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00030 (2022)
40. Mahi Shafiullah, N.M., Rai, A., Etukuru, H., Liu, Y., Misra, I., Chintala, S., Pinto,
    L.: On bringing robots home. arXiv e-prints pp. arXiv–2311 (2023)
41. Majumdar, A., Yadav, K., Arnaud, S., Ma, Y.J., Chen, C., Silwal, S., Jain, A.,
    Berges, V.P., Abbeel, P., Malik, J., et al.: Where are we in the search for an
    artificial visual cortex for embodied intelligence? arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18240
    (2023)
42. Mandlekar, A., Zhu, Y., Garg, A., Booher, J., Spero, M., Tung, A., Gao, J., Em-
    mons, J., Gupta, A., Orbay, E., et al.: Roboturk: A crowdsourcing platform for
    robotic skill learning through imitation. In: Conference on Robot Learning. pp.
    879–893. PMLR (2018)
43. Mo, K., Guibas, L.J., Mukadam, M., Gupta, A., Tulsiani, S.: Where2act: From
    pixels to actions for articulated 3d objects. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
    International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 6813–6823 (2021)
44. Nagarajan, T., Feichtenhofer, C., Grauman, K.: Grounded human-object interac-
    tion hotspots from video. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-
    ence on Computer Vision. pp. 8688–8697 (2019)
45. Nair, S., Rajeswaran, A., Kumar, V., Finn, C., Gupta, A.: R3m: A universal visual
    representation for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12601 (2022)
46. Padalkar, A., Pooley, A., Jain, A., Bewley, A., Herzog, A., Irpan, A., Khazatsky,
    A., Rai, A., Singh, A., Brohan, A., et al.: Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning
    datasets and rt-x models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08864 (2023)
47. Pan, C., Okorn, B., Zhang, H., Eisner, B., Held, D.: Tax-pose: Task-specific cross-
    pose estimation for robot manipulation. In: Conference on Robot Learning. pp.
    1783–1792. PMLR (2023)
48. Parisi, S., Rajeswaran, A., Purushwalkam, S., Gupta, A.: The unsurprising effec-
    tiveness of pre-trained vision models for control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03580
    (2022)
18      H. Bharadhwaj et al.

49. Peebles, W., Xie, S.: Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In: Proceedings
    of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 4195–4205
    (2023)
50. Qin, Y., Wu, Y.H., Liu, S., Jiang, H., Yang, R., Fu, Y., Wang, X.: Dexmv: Im-
    itation learning for dexterous manipulation from human videos. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2108.05877 (2021)
51. Qin, Z., Fang, K., Zhu, Y., Fei-Fei, L., Savarese, S.: Keto: Learning keypoint rep-
    resentations for tool manipulation. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on
    Robotics and Automation (ICRA). pp. 7278–7285. IEEE (2020)
52. Rad, M., Lepetit, V.: Bb8: A scalable, accurate, robust to partial occlusion method
    for predicting the 3d poses of challenging objects without using depth. ICCV (2017)
53. Rong, Y., Shiratori, T., Joo, H.: Frankmocap: Fast monocular 3d hand and body
    motion capture by regression and integration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.08324
    (2020)
54. Seita, D., Wang, Y., Shetty, S.J., Li, E.Y., Erickson, Z., Held, D.: Toolflownet:
    Robotic manipulation with tools via predicting tool flow from point clouds. In:
    Conference on Robot Learning. pp. 1038–1049. PMLR (2023)
55. Shan, D., Geng, J., Shu, M., Fouhey, D.: Understanding human hands in contact
    at internet scale. In: CVPR (2020)
56. Shaw, K., Bahl, S., Pathak, D.: Videodex: Learning dexterity from internet videos.
    In: 6th Annual Conference on Robot Learning
57. Smith, L., Dhawan, N., Zhang, M., Abbeel, P., Levine, S.: Avid: Learning multi-
    stage tasks via pixel-level translation of human videos. arXiv (2019)
58. Spurr, A., Song, J., Park, S., Hilliges, O.: Cross-modal deep variational hand pose
    estimation. In: CVPR (2018)
59. De la Torre, F., Hodgins, J., Bargteil, A., Martin, X., Macey, J., Collado, A.,
    Beltran, P.: Guide to the carnegie mellon university multimodal activity (cmu-
    mmac) database (2009)
60. Vecerik, M., Doersch, C., Yang, Y., Davchev, T., Aytar, Y., Zhou, G., Hadsell,
    R., Agapito, L., Scholz, J.: Robotap: Tracking arbitrary points for few-shot visual
    imitation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.15975 (2023)
61. Walke, H.R., Black, K., Zhao, T.Z., Vuong, Q., Zheng, C., Hansen-Estruch, P., He,
    A.W., Myers, V., Kim, M.J., Du, M., et al.: Bridgedata v2: A dataset for robot
    learning at scale. In: Conference on Robot Learning. pp. 1723–1736. PMLR (2023)
62. Wang, C., Fan, L., Sun, J., Zhang, R., Fei-Fei, L., Xu, D., Zhu, Y., Anandkumar,
    A.: Mimicplay: Long-horizon imitation learning by watching human play. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2302.12422 (2023)
63. Wen, C., Lin, X., So, J., Chen, K., Dou, Q., Gao, Y., Abbeel, P.: Any-point tra-
    jectory modeling for policy learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00025 (2023)
64. Xiang, Y., Schmidt, T., Narayanan, V., Fox, D.: Posecnn: A convolutional neural
    network for 6d object pose estimation in cluttered scenes. arXiv (2018)
65. Xiao, T., Radosavovic, I., Darrell, T., Malik, J.: Masked visual pre-training for
    motor control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06173 (2022)
66. Xiong, H., Li, Q., Chen, Y.C., Bharadhwaj, H., Sinha, S., Garg, A.: Learning
    by watching: Physical imitation of manipulation skills from human videos. arXiv
    (2021)
67. Xu, H., Zhang, J., Cai, J., Rezatofighi, H., Yu, F., Tao, D., Geiger, A.: Unifying
    flow, stereo and depth estimation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
    Machine Intelligence (2023)
68. Yan, W., Hafner, D., James, S., Abbeel, P.: Temporally consistent transformers for
    video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02396 (2022)
                                                                   Track2Act       19

69. Yang, M., Du, Y., Ghasemipour, K., Tompson, J., Schuurmans, D., Abbeel, P.:
    Learning interactive real-world simulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06114 (2023)
70. Young, S., Gandhi, D., Tulsiani, S., Gupta, A., Abbeel, P., Pinto, L.: Visual imi-
    tation made easy. In: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) (2020)
71. Zhao, T.Z., Kumar, V., Levine, S., Finn, C.: Learning fine-grained bimanual ma-
    nipulation with low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705 (2023)
72. Zimmermann, C., Brox, T.: Learning to estimate 3d hand pose from single rgb
    images. In: CVPR (2017)
73. Zitkovich, B., Yu, T., Xu, S., Xu, P., Xiao, T., Xia, F., Wu, J., Wohlhart, P.,
    Welker, S., Wahid, A., et al.: Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web
    knowledge to robotic control. In: Conference on Robot Learning. pp. 2165–2183.
    PMLR (2023)
20      H. Bharadhwaj et al.

Appendix
6.1   Video results
Please refer to the supplementary website https://homangab.github.io/track2act/
for detailed qualitative results of our framework including robot video evalua-
tions.

6.2   Robot Experiment Details
We perform all robot manipulation experiments with a Boston Dynamics Spot
Robot, operated through end-effector control. The robot is a quadruped with
an arm attached to its base. We connect a front-facing Intel Realsense camera
to the base such that it always moves with the robot, and it static with respect
to the base. The end-effector of the arm is a two-fingered gripper. The horizon
H of rollouts is 50 steps, and we operate the robot at a frequency of 5 Hz.
For the residual policy, at each step we predict actions h = 4 time-steps in the
future, and execute the first action. We execute the predicted actions on the
robot through an Inverse Kinematics (IK) controller. This controller converts
the end-effector poses to robot joint actions for appropriately manipulating the
arm. We use the IK controller provided by Boston Dynamics for this purpose.

6.3   Track Prediction Model details
We instantiate track prediction as a denoising process through a DiT based
diffusion model [49]. Let I0 denote the first frame of a video, and G denote the
goal, which we consider to be the last frame of the video. For longer videos,
we obtain multiple video clips of 4-5 seconds each for training. Let there be p
points in the initial frame to be tracked, such that P0 denotes the set of those
points and let H be the prediction horizon. [Pt ]H
                                                 t=1 denotes the future locations of
those points in the subsequent time-steps that we want to predict. In the forward
diffusion process, all the points Pt are corrupted by incrementally adding noise
ϵk (k denotes the diffusion time-step), to obtain P̃t , and converging to a unit
Gaussian distribution N (0, I). New samples can be generated by reversing the
forward diffusion process, by going from Gaussian noise back to the space of
point locations. To solve the reverse diffusion process, we need to train a noise
predictor Vθ (I0 , G, P0 , k). We design a DiT Transformer based architecture [49]
for Vθ illustrated visually in Fig. 3. Different from the original DiT model, we
condition on embeddings of initial (z0 ) and goal (zg ) images in addition to that of
the diffusion step (zk ). The input to the Transformer in each batch is a sequence
of p tokens corresponding the number of points specified for tracking. The initial
P0 points are not noisy, as is the convention in training conditional diffusion
models on time-series data. We train the prediction model with web videos by
considering variable number of initial points p that need to be tracked. We vary
p from 200 to 400. For flexible modeling, the locations of the p points are also
randomized, such that at test-time any set of points in the initial image can be
                                                                       Track2Act        21

specified. We do not make any assumptions on objects to be tracked or camera
motions in the videos, and do not curate the training videos in any way apart
from ensuring they are of 4-5 second duration.
    The model has 24 DiT blocks, with a hidden size of 1024, and 16 heads. The
ResNet18 embeddings of initial image and goal image have dimensions 512. The
condition to each DiT block consists of the sum of initial image embedding, goal
image embedding, and diffusion time-step embedding through adaptive modu-
lation (adaLN) layers. The adaptive modulation layers and final MLP layers are
zero-initialized, and the rest are Xavier uniform initialized. We use Adam op-
timizer with default Adam betas = (0.9,0.999) and a constant learning rate of
1e-4 for experiments. The rest of the architecture and training details are similar
to DiT [49].



6.4   Residual Policy Model details


To correct the predicted open-loop plan, with a small amount of embodimen-
specific data, we propose learning a residual policy πres (It , G, τ, [āt ]H
                                                                            t=1 ) shown in
Fig. 4 to correct the predicted end-effector poses in each time-step. So the end-
effector pose at time t is ât = āt + ∆at ; where ∆at = πres (It , G, τ, [āt ]H     t=1 )
Instead of predicting just a single residual action ∆at we predict residuals h
steps in the future ∆at:t+h and during deployment execute just the first action.
This multi-step prediction has been shown to mitigate compounding errors in
behavior-cloning based training [5, 71]. We can learn the residual policy with
a small amount of robot demonstrations (∼ 400 trajectories overall) of repre-
sentative tasks through behavior cloning. The data for each trajectory consists
of observation-action pairs of the form [(It , at )]H
                                                    t=1 . Here, It denotes images ob-
served from the robot’s camera and at denotes actions in the form of end-effector
poses.
    The residual policy model is a Transformer based on the DiT architecture.
The model has 12 DiT blocks, with a hidden size of 512, and 8 heads. The
ResNet18 embeddings of initial image and goal image have dimensions 512. The
condition to each DiT block consists of the sum of current image embedding,
goal image embedding, and emebedding of the current time-step t through adap-
tive modulation (adaLN) layers. The adaptive modulation layers and final MLP
layers are zero-initialized, and the rest are Xavier uniform initialized. We use
Adam optimizer with default Adam betas = (0.9,0.999) and a constant learning
rate of 1e-4 for experiments. The input to the model consists of the predicted
tracks of p points in the initial image (we keep p = 400 to ensure a dense grid
in the initial image of dimensions 256x256x3) and the predicted open-loop plan
with h steps from t : t + h. So there are p + h input tokens. We read off the
final h tokens corresponding to the updated open-loop plan for these h steps and
after a final MLP layer, output actions for h steps . We will release all code and
models upon acceptance.
22      H. Bharadhwaj et al.

6.5   Training Data for Track Prediction


We use four different web data sources for training the track prediction model
- videos from Something-Something-v2 [21], Epic-Kitchens [10], RT1 data [8],
and BridgeData [61]. Something-Something-v2 contains short YouTube videos of
people doing everyday activities. We consider videos from this dataset as is, and
choose the first frame as the initial image and the last frame as goal image. Epic-
Kitchens contains ego-centric videos of humans in different locations performing
diverse tasks in kitchens. Since these videos are long (≥ 20 min each), we choose
clips of duration 4-5 seconds by cutting the long videos, and choosing clips where
a human hand is visible in the scene (so as to have clips where an object is being
manipulated, instead of a person just moving around). RT1 Data and Bridge
Data are large-scale robot datasets that contains rollouts of two different types
of robots being tele-operated for different tasks. For these datasets, we consider
the first and last images to be the first and last frames of a rollout, and each
rollout to be a separate video.
    In total we obtain around 400,000 videos clips from the above sources, choose
a dense grid of 400 points on the first frame and we run Co-Tracker [29] on these
clips, for obtaining the ground-truth intermediate tracks of points. Our predic-
tion model is conditioned on the first and last frames for each video, and the
task of predicting the tracks of random points on the initial frame is supervised
by the tracks we obtain from Co-Tracker (ground-truth).



6.6   Training Data for Residual Policy


For training the residual policy we collected tele-operated demonstrations with
the Spot robot by controlling it with a joystick across 10 tasks in 3 physical loca-
tions. These scenarios correspond to only a subset of the diverse tasks, objects,
and scenes we consider for evaluation . Concretely, the evaluation scenarios with
same tasks as the collected data correspond to the mild generalization (MG)
category. Rest of the generalization axes corresponding to unseen instances and
categories are described in detail in section 4.1.
    The training data consists of 400 teleoperated trajectories, each consisting
of H (observation,action) pairs (H = 50). The data for each trajectory consists
of observation-action pairs of the form [(It , at )]H
                                                    t=1 . Here, It denotes images ob-
served from the robot’s camera and at denotes actions in the form of end-effector
poses. This data is collected at the same frequency of 5 Hz that we deploy the
policy for eventual evaluations. Note that this embodiment-specific data we col-
lect is 3-4 orders of magnitude less than that what related works [5,8,73] require
for policy learning. This is a major advantage of our framework as it precludes
the need to spend years on real-world data collection, while achieving general-
ization to more diverse scenarios by virtue of leveraging passive web videos for
track prediction.
                                                                 Track2Act      23

6.7   Details on baselines


We perform several comparisons with baselines and ablation studies for goal-
conditioned robot manipulation. For baselines, we use the same embodiment-
specific demonstrations as Ours, the goal-conditioned policy that predicts resid-
uals over open-loop actions at each time-step (Algorithm ??).

 – Goal-Conditioned BC is a baseline for multi-task policy learning, similar to
   prior works [5, 8, 73]. This is trained with the same data we use for training
   our residual policy, and is conditioned on goal image, similar to our residual
   policy.
 – Affordance-Conditioned BC is the approach from [3] that conditions the pol-
   icy on predicted affordances in the initial image. These affordances capture
   what is plausible to be manipulated in the scene, and so are different from
   our time-series predictions of point tracks. We directly adopt the affordance
   model from [3] that was trained on web data, and use the same embodiment-
   specific data as our residual policy for training through conditional behavior
   cloning.
 – Video-Conditioned BC based on [14,17,33] first predicts RGB video and then
   does tracking on top of it. We adopt the video prediction model from [17]
   (without language conditioning) trained on web data, and use the same
   embodiment-specific data as our residual policy for training through condi-
   tional behavior cloning.
 – Hand-Object Mask Conditioned BC from [4] conditions the policy on a pre-
   dicted interaction plan consisting of masks of hands and objects. We use the
   hand-object plan prediction model from [4], and use the same embodiment-
   specific data as our residual policy for training through conditional behav-
   ior cloning. Note that this baseline is slightly different from the translation
   model in [4] because we do not collect paired human-robot demonstrations
   unlike [4] and so the policy is conditioned on predicted hand-object plans as
   opposed to ground-truth plans unlike [4].

    Comparison to Goal-Conditioned BC helps understand the potential bene-
fits of leveraging web data for generalizable manipulation, and comparisons to
Affordance-Conditioned BC, Video-Conditioned BC, Hand-Object Mask Condi-
tioned BC help understand the potential of predicting point tracks from web
videos, compared to other ways of using web data for prediction geared towards
manipulation.
Ours (Open Loop) is the approach for track prediction followed by open-loop ex-
ecution as described in Algorithm 1. This does not use any embodiment-specific
data for training. To understand the benefit of predicting residuals over actions
as opposed to predicting complete actions, we compare with an ablated variant
Ours (actions; not residuals) that predicts actions ât directly without predicting
residuals ∆at and not relying on an open-loop plan as input.
24      H. Bharadhwaj et al.

6.8   Qualitative Results for baselines

We provide qualitative comparisons of the baselines with our approach, in the
figures below. For detailed qualitative video results of our approach, please refer
to the website.




Fig. 8: Type Generalization (TG). We show rollouts from baselines for the same goal.
The views are from a third person camera.
                                                                Track2Act      25




Fig. 9: Compositional Generalization (CG). We show rollouts from baselines for the
same goal. The views are from a third person camera.
26     H. Bharadhwaj et al.




Fig. 10: Standard Generalization (G). We show rollouts from baselines for the same
goal. The views are from a third person camera.
                                                                    Track2Act        27




Fig. 11: Mild Generalization (MG). We show rollouts from baselines for the same goal.
The views are from a third person camera.




Fig. 12: We show visualizations of predictions from the Hand-Object Mask Prediction
and Affordance Prediction baselines, on different initial and goal images in the robot’s
environment.
