Perception, 1999, volume 28, pages 1311 ^ 1328


DOI:10.1068/p2935


The roles of vision and eye movements in the control
of activities of daily living

Michael Land, Neil Mennie, Jennifer Rusted
Sussex Centre for Neuroscience and Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, School of Biological
Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9QG, UK; e-mail: M.F.Land@sussex.ac.uk
Received 4 May 1999, in revised form 9 August 1999



Abstract. The aim of this study was to determine the pattern of fixations during the performance
of a well-learned task in a natural setting (making tea), and to classify the types of monitoring
action that the eyes perform. We used a head-mounted eye-movement video camera, which provided
a continuous view of the scene ahead, with a dot indicating foveal direction with an accuracy of
about 1 deg. A second video camera recorded the subject's activities from across the room. The
videos were linked and analysed frame by frame. Foveal direction was always close to the object
being manipulated, and very few fixations were irrelevant to the task. The first object-related
fixation typically led the first indication of manipulation by 0.56 s, and vision moved to the next
object about 0.61 s before manipulation of the previous object was complete. Each object-related act
that did not involve a waiting period lasted an average of 3.3 s and involved about 7 fixations.
Roughly a third of all fixations on objects could be definitely identified with one of four monitor-
ing functions: locating objects used later in the process, directing the hand or object in the hand
to a new location, guiding the approach of one object to another (eg kettle and lid), and checking
the state of some variable (eg water level). We conclude that although the actions of tea-making
are `automated' and proceed with little conscious involvement, the eyes closely monitor every step
of the process. This type of unconscious attention must be a common phenomenon in everyday life.

1 Introduction
Most of the actions that make up our lives involve vision, if we are normally sighted.
We have to locate objects, change their positions, manipulate them in various ways,
all presumably under visual control. We have little or no conscious knowledge of where
our eyes are fixating at any instant, and because of this we tend to think of the eyes
as passive receivers, rather like cameras, taking up and passing on the information
required for the particular task. However, scrutiny of the eyes of someone engaged in a
complex motor task shows that this is not the case. The eyes dart from one place to
another, two or three times a second. In this study we ask the question: are these eye
movements essentially random, or are they intimately related to the requirements of
the motor task? If the latter is true, are fixations directed specifically to the places
from which information is needed, and can the eye-movement pattern thus be thought
of as an integral part of the motor program itself?
    In activities where movements of the eyes have been much studied, such as reading
(O'Regan 1990; Rayner 1995), music reading (Weaver 1943; Land and Furneaux 1997), and
steering a car (Land and Lee 1994), the strategy of the oculomotor system is to keep the
centre of gaze very close to the point at which information is extracted öwithin a few
letters or notes in text and music reading, and within a few degrees of the inside of the
bend (the tangent points) when steering on a winding road. In an artificial task that
involved the assembly of a copy of a pattern made of coloured blocks, Ballard et al (1992)
and Hayhoe et al (1998) found that every actionöchoosing a block, checking its colour,
finding its proper positionöinvolved a new fixation, with eye movements generally
preceding motor acts by a fraction of a second. Eye movements thus seem to be quite
tightly coupled, temporally and spatially, to the motor actions of the particular task.
    In this paper we ask to what extent this is true for everyday activities, and
we have chosen to study the rather archetypal task of making tea (Rusted et al 1995).
1312                                                                  M Land, N Mennie, J Rusted




This differs from the tasks discussed above in that it is not repetitive. Each of the
40 ^ 50 acts involved in tea-making is unique, and so requires both a different motor
program and presumably a different pattern of eye movements as well. Thus we can
expect to learn not only how eye movements are involved in single acts, but how these
acts join together. A key question here is to what extent the eyes are proactive and
lead the motor program, seeking out information that will be required in the near
future, or whether they are essentially reactive, being called up by the motor program
when specific information is required. We will show that visual fixation does indeed
precede motor manipulation, putting eye movements in the vanguard of each motor
act, rather than as adjuncts to it.
    To our knowledge there have so far been no studies of the eye movements involved
in activities of daily living, in a natural setting. This is no doubt because, until recently,
most eye-movement recording devices were not suitable for use outside the laboratory.
Here we have employed a lightweight head-mounted eye camera used previously for
driving studies (Land and Lee 1994). It provides a view of the scene ahead, with a dot
that indicates foveal direction, as well as the coordinates of eye direction relative to
the head (figure 1).

(a)                                               (b)




Figure 1. Prints from (a) the activity video, and (b) eye-movement video of the same instant,
when the sweetener is dropped into the mug (3.14 on figure 3). The head-mounted camera and
backpack are shown in (a). In (b) the white dot is the direction of regard of the fovea (into the
mug). The eye can be seen in the bottom third of the frame, with a bright ellipse fitting the iris.
The angular width of upper part of the frame is approximately 35 deg. Note that (b) is right ^
left reversed compared with (a) because of the mirror in the camera system.

    Tea-making, at least for the British population, is a very familiar, overlearned
activity involving a sequence of actions which typically occur in a particular order.
Such automated activities, comprising `stereotypic sequences of actions' (Schank and
Abelson 1977), are sometimes supposed not to require feedback for their execution
(Underwood and Everatt 1996). Once learned, they cease to require on-line monitoring
or supervisory attention (Norman and Shallice 1986; Shallice 1988), and run directly
from a memory `script'. The principal conclusion from the study presented here is that
almost every act in the tea-making sequence is guided and checked by vision, with
eye movements usually preceding motor actions. Thus in a literal sense it is not true
that these supposedly automated acts are under open-loop control, and it opens up
the question of what is meant by `supervisory attention', when the eyes are manifestly
attending to the objects involved in automated behaviours.
    Preliminary accounts of this study have appeared elsewhere (Findlay 1998; Land
et al 1998; Hayhoe and Land 1999).
Eye movements in everyday life                                                                      1313




2 Methods
Three subjects (ML, male, aged 55; SF, female, aged 28; JB, male, aged 46) each
made a cup of tea in a small rectangular kitchen in the University. The room had a
worktop (counter) on the left of the door, a sink straight in front, and another worktop
and refrigerators on the right (see figures 1 and 2). The subjects had seen the kitchen
once on a previous day, but the positions of the various objects and utensilsökettle,
teapot, etcöhad been changed, so that some search was needed before each could be used.
    Actions were monitored by a video camera to the right of the sink. Eye movements
were recorded with a device previously used in driving studies (Land 1993; Land and Lee
1994). It consisted of a small video camera (ELMO) mounted on a band from a con-
struction helmet clamped firmly to the head. The camera's field of view was split optically
                                                                ML




(a)
                                                                SF




(b)
                                                                JB




(c)
Figure 2. Record of the fixations made by three subjects during the first sequence after the kettle is
first detected (0.05 ^ 0.20 on figure 3), and during which the kettle is moved from the worktop (left)
to the sink (right). Because of the changing viewpoint, the angular relations are only approximate,
but fixation positions relative to the objects of regard are accurately represented. Note the asso-
ciations of fixations with particular objects or other entitiesökettle, sink, kettle and lid, taps, water
streamöwhich correspond in time to the actions that relate to them. Note also the rough corre-
spondence in the numbers of fixations that are devoted by each subject to corresponding objects.
1314                                                                M Land, N Mennie, J Rusted




so that the upper two-thirds imaged the view ahead via a part-silvered mirror in front of
(but not obscuring) the left eye (figure 1b). The eye and camera lens had the same virtual
location, giving a parallax-free image. The lower third of the field imaged the eye itself
via a concave mirror (10 cm focal length) in front of and slightly below the eye. In this way
the scene ahead and the eye with its various movements were recorded together onto a
portable video recorder (SONY Video Walkman) housed in a backpack. Later, the tape
was played back frame by frame, via a mixer that added a computer-generated model
of the eye in which the outline of the modelled iris was marked with a bright ring. This
model could be manipulated with a tracker ball, so that the model iris fitted the real one.
With proper calibration this fit meant that the angular coordinates of the model corre-
sponded to the direction of view of the eye itself, relative to the head. These were
stored, and also used to generate a spot that was superimposed onto the `head's eye'
view, which showed the direction of gaze on the scene to an accuracy of about 1 deg
(roughly the width of the spot on figure 1b). Each frame, with the spot on, was
re-recorded onto a second videotape with a single-shot recorder (Panasonic AG-6720),
and this second-generation tape was used for all subsequent measurements.
    The two tapes (activities and eye movements) were synchronised, and examined
frame by frame to determine the timings of all actions of the body and limbs and
manipulations of objects, and all eye movements, to an accuracy of better than 0.1 s,
during the 4 min it took to make the tea. In this paper one session from each subject
has been analysed in full, a total of about 36 000 frames. One video is available on
the web site: http://www.biols.sussex.ac.uk/Home/Jenny Rusted/ as well as the journal
web site http://www.perceptionweb.com/perc1199/land.html, and will be archived on the
CD-ROM distributed with issue 12 of the journal.

3 Results
3.1 Levels of description
It is possible to divide up the tea-making task in many different ways. The operation
can be thought of as a control hierarchy in which the largest units describe the goals
and subgoals of the operation. For example the overall (level 1) goal `make the tea'
can be divided into subgoals (level 2) `put the kettle on', `make the tea', `prepare the
cups'. These comprise smaller (level 3) acts such as `fill the kettle', `warm the pot',
which themselves can be broken down into component actions. Taking `filling the
kettle' as an example, the individual actions involved are `find the kettle', `lift the kettle',
`remove the lid', `transport to sink', `locate and turn on tap', `move kettle to water
stream', `turn off tap when full', `replace lid', `transport to worktop'. These 4th level acts
seem to be irreducible, in a functional sense.
    There is, however, a fifth level of subdivision, represented by eye fixations (figure 2).
Our eye-movement recordings show that each of the nine level-4 acts, just listed, involves
an average of 5.4 fixations (range 4.7 ^ 6.3). The fixations are not, in general, directly
synchronised to specific actions of the limbs (although certain fixations may have quite
specific functions within each level-4 act ösee `specific roles of fixations' below). What
is clear, however, is that almost all fixations that are made while a level-4 act is in
progress are directed to the object or objects involved in that act. Thus in figure 2a the
subject spends 12 fixations on the kettle, 3 on the area of the sink before approaching it,
4 on the kettle while removing the lid in transit, 3 on the taps, and 4 on the water stream,
with one apparently `irrelevant' glance to the sink tidy. In spite of minor differences in the
order of the component acts, the other two subjects showed remarkable similarities in the
way their eyes covered the same operations. In particular the numbers of fixations
devoted to each object were similar: kettle 7 ^ 12, lid 2 ^ 4, taps 3 ^ 4 (visited twice
by JB). The two apparently irrelevant fixations to the right on figure 2c were in fact
to the spot at which JB was about to put the lid down.
Eye movements in everyday life                                                         1315




    To the extent that one can speak of `natural' units of behaviour, the best candidates
seem to be these conjunctions of visual fixation and manipulation, linked to objects.
Within each unit, visual involvement and action last about the same time, although
there are slight differences in timing at the beginnings and ends of each unit (vision
typically leads action by a second or less ösee figure 4). At either end of each unit
there is nearly always a clearly identifiable large saccade that switches gaze from one
object to another, but within the unit gaze rarely strays from the object of interest;
fewer than 5% of fixations were to `irrelevant' parts of the visual field (examples are
the saccade to the sink tidy on the far right of figure 2a, and to the tray at the left in
figure 2b). During each unit, all one's sensory-motor equipment appears to be involved
with a single object-centred task. In figure 3 the complete record for ML has been
divided in alternating greys in a way that emphasises these units. We will refer to them
as `object-related actions' (ORAs) from now on, and define them as the sets of acts
(including eye movements) associated with the current object of fixation.
    ORAs are generally the same as the level-4 units discussed earlier, but may sometimes
be more like level-3 actions. This happens when several things are done to an object
without re-fixation onto a new object, as for example when the sweeteners were found,
used, and returned to the shelf (figure 3, 3.09 to 3.16). They also correspond quite closely
to the A-1 units of action described by Schwartz et al (1991, 1995), which were simple
manipulations related to objects (see section 6). Our ORAs are not identical to A-1s
because they include fixations as well as actions (the beginnings and ends of ORAs are
defined by the timings of the saccades to and from particular objects), but ORAs share
with A-1s the sense of linkage to objects.
    Whilst the majority of ORAs are simple visuo-motor conjunctions as described, a
few are more complex. Some actions are `embedded' in others. For example, between
0.11 and 0.14 (figures 2a and 3) the kettle lid is removed as the kettle is being taken
to the sink, with the lid being viewed between fixations on the sink. On a very few
other occasions two actions really are performed at the same time. For example,
between 3.30 and 3.40 one hand puts the top on the milk while the other swirls the
teapot (see figure 8k). In this case, gaze alternates between the teapot spout and the
milk. Clearly, time-sharing is possible, but it is not very common. There were also
occasional instances, especially in JB's record, where the eyes would engage an object
and the hands contact it, but where fixation was interrupted by a 1 ^ 2 s spell of search
before manipulation was resumed. Thus the ORA classification of acts is not entirely
without problems, but it is certainly the dominant pattern to emerge from the data.
    In contrast to the clear temporal boundaries of the ORAs, there is nothing special
in either the visual or motor domains that distinguishes the beginnings and ends of
the larger (level 2 and 3) units from each other. The logical status of these operations
in the goal structure of the task does not seem to be reflected in the way they are
executed or terminated.
    Three classes of activity involve vision but no action. The eyes may move across
the scene simply to relocate gaze from one place to another, and where the total move-
ment is large enough (eg 1808 from one counter to the other) this may be done either
in a single large (gaze) saccade, or a series of somewhat smaller ones. There is no indi-
cation here that the visual system is looking for anything, and often the vestibulo-ocular
reflex is suspended during these large saccades, with gaze direction being carried passively
by the head rotation (this conclusion is based on patterns of eye ^ head coordination
observed in this study). In other cases a very similar pattern of eye movements
is associated with true search, as in the search between 0.48 and 0.52 (figure 3) when
the teapot is located, and then between 0.53 and 0.57 when the tea caddy is found.
Thirdly, the eyes may be looking `aimlessly' around, as for example in two episodes of
looking out of the window while waiting for the tap water to warm up (1.16 to 1.27).
gross body movements
targets of visual fixation
actions, and
manipulations time
(minutes and seconds)




Figure 3. Complete sequence of visual and motor events during a single tea-making session by
subject ML. In each set of three rows the uppermost row shows the durations of gross body
movements, the middle row shows the object or objects fixated by the eyes, and the bottom
row the objects being manipulated by the hands. There is a close correspondence throughout
between the object that is fixated and that manipulated, as indicated by the corresponding shading
in the lower two rows, or all three rows when a gross movement is also involved. Unshaded regions
indicate search, or other forms of looking around, where no action is involved. The asterisk at
0.28 indicates a vocal instruction (see text); otherwise the whole task is self-paced. The time scale
is used in the text to refer to particular actions.
Eye movements in everyday life                                                                                                     1317




4 Time relationships of vision and motor acts
Each ORA, as defined above, involves visual engagement with an object, and manipula-
tion of that object. It may, in addition, require gross body movement if, for example,
the object is in a different part of the room. What comes first? Do the eyes seek the
object before action starts, or are vision and action simultaneous? How do the body
movements fit in? We examined all ORAs in the three records (137 in total), excluding
only periods when two actions were occurring simultaneously (eg between 3.15 and
3.40 in figure 3). For the others, the times of the first movement of the body, of the
first saccade to the relevant object, and of the first indication of a hand or limb move-
ment related to that object were all determined. The average results are shown in
figure 4. 42% of the ORAs involved whole-body movements, and only these contribute
to the upper record. About 30% of the 43 ORAs were excluded from the histogram
showing the timings at the end of the units, because they involved waiting for some-
thing to happen (eg for the kettle to fill). This prolonged them beyond the `natural'
time-course of the action itself.

               20
observations
 Number of




               10

                0
                 ÿ3 ÿ2 ÿ1       0 1     2     3    4                                         1s
                               Time=s


                                            Whole body movement (A)

                                             (a)

                                                             Visual fixation of object (B)

                                                       (b)                                              (c)

                                                                    Manipulation of object (C)

                      50                                                                            50
       observations
        Number of




                                                                                     observations




                      40                                                                            40
                                                                                      Number of




                      30                                                                            30
                      20                                                                            20
                      10                                                                            10
                       0                                                                             0
                       ÿ2 ÿ1   0     1 2      3    4                                                  ÿ2 ÿ1   0     1 2    3   4
                                   Time=s                                                                         Time=s

Figure 4. Average relative timings of body movements (A), visual fixation of particular objects
(B, which may involve several individual fixations), and manipulation of those objects (C). Note
that body movements lead vision (a), which leads manipulative actions (b), in each case by an
average of about half a second. Typically, gaze moves on to the next object before completion
of manipulation of the current object (c). All times are taken from the centre point of the first
saccade to the new object (line 2), as this is the best-defined instant in the sequence. Pooled
data from all three subjects; individual statistics are provided in table 1.

    Figure 4 shows that the average duration of the visual component of an ORA is 3.04 s
and the motor component 3.25 s. The first sign of a progression from one unit to the next
is often a gross movement of the body; the trunk, it seems, gets the new instructions
first. On average, the beginning of the trunk movement precedes the first saccade
to the object to be manipulated by 0.61 s, and that saccade precedes the first sign
of manipulation (eg the beginning of a movement of the arm towards the object
fixated) by 0.56 s. As the histogram shows, most of these delays lie between 0 and 1 s.
1318                                                                  M Land, N Mennie, J Rusted




At the end of each ORA, gaze typically moves on to the next object between 0 and
1 s before the last motor act has been completed (mean 0.61 s). These observations
are consistent with the idea that vision starts to supply information to a buffer up to
a second before that information is used, and that the buffer continues to disgorge
information for up to a second after visual input to it has ceased (Land and Furneaux
1997). In single acts of pointing and reaching discussed by Jeannerod (1988) the eyes
led the hand, but by a much shorter time ( 5 0:2 s), possibly because little or no
buffering is involved in simple acts of this kind, or because repeated tasks require
less visual processing.
    Table 1 gives details of these timings for each of the three subjects. Again there is
remarkable consistency in the durations of the components of the acts, and in the leads
and lags involved. In particular, all three sets of timings conform to the sequence
depicted in figure 4. Statistically, none of the lead and lag differences between individuals
reached a 5% level of significance (Student's t-test), which would require a difference in
the means of about 0.3 s. However, in the durations of the components, ML and SF
differed significantly from each other ( p 5 0:05) on one of the three pairings, but both
ML and SF differed from JB on two of the three pairings. JB's ORAs tended to be
somewhat longer, partly because of his tendency to insert brief episodes of search, as
mentioned earlier.
Table 1. Durations of components of object-related acts and their relative timings [mean  standard
deviation (number of observations)]. See figure 4 for meanings of (A), (a) etc.

                                       Duration of components=s

                                       ML                  SF                   JB

Whole body movement (A)                2.731.17 (15)      1.820.71 (21)       2.861.38 (22)
Visual fixation of object (B)          2.601.37 (37)      2.801.80 (44)       3.832.09 (34)
Manipulation of object (C)             2.831.68 (32)      3.011.66 (41)       3.962.14 (33)
                                       Leads and lags of components=s

                                       ML                  SF                   JB

Body leads fixation (a)                0.630.55 (16)      0.511.59 (21)       0.691.19 (22)
Vision leads manipulation (b)          0.570.69 (42)      0.430.57 (41)       0.680.97 (37)
Manipulation offset lags vision (c)    0.560.92 (41)      0.570.69 (41)       0.710.88 (36)


    One episode is of particular interest because it involved a definite conscious intrusion
into what otherwise seemed to be a well automated task. At 0.28 on figure 3 (asterisk),
as the filled kettle was having its lid put on, it was pointed out to the subject that he
was making tea for one only, not an army. After a short latency (it was not possible
to tell exactly which word was the trigger) there was a change in the direction of
body movement, a fixation shift back to the water in the kettle, and the beginning of
lid removal. In contrast to the half-second asynchronies in ordinary self-paced acts
(figure 4), the body movement, fixation, and manipulation change were all simultaneous
here, to within 0.1 s.

5 Eye movements
5.1 Overall pattern and statistics
The distribution of saccade sizes for the whole of the three records is shown in figure 5a.
In each there is a peak between 2.5 and 10 deg, with very few saccades smaller than
this (1 deg saccades were readily detectable, so the absence of small saccades is real;
microsaccades much smaller than 1 deg would have been missed, however, if present).
Eye movements in everyday life                                                                                                                   1319




                      80                                  ML                               80                                           ML




                                                                     Number of saccades
Number of saccades




                      60                                                                   60

                      40                      mean ˆ 20:2 deg                              40                          mean ˆ 0:58 s
                                              n ˆ 401                                                                  n ˆ 401
                      20                                                                   20

                       0                                                                    0




                      80                                  SF                               80                                           SF


                                                                     Number of saccades
Number of saccades




                      60                                                                   60

                      40                                                                   40
                                              mean ˆ 20:1 deg                                                          mean ˆ 0:43 s
                                              n ˆ 412                                                                  n ˆ 412
                      20                                                                   20

                       0                                                                    0




                     120                                  JB                              100                                           JB
                                                                     Number of saccades
Number of saccades




                     100                                                                   80
                      80
                                                                                           60
                      60                      mean ˆ 18:1 deg                                                          mean ˆ 0:48 s
                                              n ˆ 545                                      40                          n ˆ 545
                      40
                      20                                                                   20
                       0                                                                    0
                           0   50         100       150        200                              0   0.5        1    1.5     2     2.5        3
                                    Saccade size=deg                                                      Intersaccade interval=s
(a)                                                                   (b)
Figure 5. (a) Distribution of gaze saccade sizes (head ‡ eye, ie the total movement of the line of
sight) during each whole session. Bin width 2.5 deg. All three subjects show a peak in the range
2.5 ^ 10 deg, a long tail of large saccades, and a high mean value. Saccades of 1 deg or larger
were detectable and are included, smaller saccades are not. (b) Histograms of intersaccade inter-
vals throughout the three sessions. Although the mean values are close to 0.5 s, the modal
values are about 0.3 s. The three distributions are very similar except that SF shows fewer very
long fixations ( 4 2 s), and ML fewer very short ones (5 150 ms). Bin width 50 ms.

The distributions have very long tails of large saccades that take the mean size for
the population to between 18.1 and 20.2 deg. Again, there is remarkable consistency in
this figure. Compared with tasks such as text and music reading or picture search,
this is a very high value [see Bahill et al 1975; typical saccades in reading are 7 letters
long (O'Regan 1990), which for standard text at a reading distance of 40 cm is between
1 and 2 deg]. Roughly speaking, the smaller saccades in the 2.5 ^ 20 deg range deal
with objects within an ORA, and the larger saccades transfer gaze between objects, or
are involved in search (see figure 2; the distributions are not bimodal because the large
relocating saccades have a wide range of amplitudes with no clear peak). It does seem
that tasks involving substantial unrestrained motor activity make use of much larger
saccades than tasks of passive scrutiny.
    The distributions of intersaccade intervals (from the onset of one saccade to the
onset of the next) is shown in figure 5b for all the saccades made during the three
sessions. They have a profile typical for such distributions from other tasks (see Viviani
1990) with the majority of intervals in the range 0.2 s to 0.5 s, means of 0.58 s, 0.43 s,
 1320                                                                                     M Land, N Mennie, J Rusted




 and 0.48 s, respectively (0.49 s overall), and with long, roughly exponential tails. Since
 a typical saccade (20 deg, see figure 5a) lasts about 70 ms (Carpenter 1988), fixation
 durations are on average shorter by this amount (mean 0.42 s). These are still long by
 comparison with fixation durations during reading (0.2 ^ 0.25 s; Rayner 1995), but not
 far from the value 0.37 s found by Furneaux (1996) for music reading.
     A factor tending to increase the mean is the comparatively large number of very long
 fixations that occur when the eyes are involved in checking actions. This is illustrated in
 figure 6, which shows the way intersaccade intervals are distributed in time during the
 session shown in figure 3. The most obvious features are the particularly long intervals
 associated with waiting tasks in which the state of some variable is being monitored.
 It seems that eye movements (1 deg or larger) are rarely made under these conditions,
 although we cannot rule out microsaccades ( 5 1 deg) during these long fixations.
 Otherwise there is little discernible structure in the record.
                                  filling   warm water       waiting for   pouring milk
                                  kettle     to teapot        kettle to      then tea
                          5
                                                             switch off

                          4
Intersaccade interval=s




                          3

                          2

                          1

                          0
                              0                  100                       200
                                            Elapsed time=s

 Figure 6. Distribution of intersaccade intervals during the whole session for subject ML (figure 3).
 The main feature is the small number of very long intervals associated with the monitoring
 of particular states, such as the amount of water in the kettle.

 5.2 Specific roles of fixations
 Figure 7 shows for the same subject as figure 3 (ML) the temporal pattern of saccades
 and fixations associated with the first part of the tasköfilling the kettle and switching
 it on. Careful inspection of the locations of the corresponding 80 fixations showed
 that 32 of them could be directly related to aspects of the task, because they preceded
 them by a second or less. These relations were of one of four types: `locating', `direct-
 ing', `guiding', and `checking'. They are defined as follows. `Locate' is used for a fixation
 on an object (eg teapot, milkösee figure 8f ) that will be used later in the process.
 It is assumed that the identity and location of the object are established in such fixa-
 tions, but, although this is often demonstrably true, it may not always be the case.
 `Direct' means that a fixation is to a location or a part of an object which is about to
 be approached and contacted by the hand, or by an object held by the hand. This
 kind of fixation appears to establish a vector for the motor system to use to control
 the approach (figures 8d, 8e, 8j). In many cases contact is not made until gaze has
 moved on from the target, implying that the final stages are not under closed-loop
 visual control. `Guide' implies one, or frequently several, fixations between two objects
 (eg kettle and lidöfigure 8c) that are approaching each other. Unlike `direct' fixations,
 these provide the more or less continuous feedback required for successful docking,
 and are usually concerned with matching orientations as well as decreasing distances.
 `Check' is used for fixation at a location where the state of some variable (eg water
 level) is being assessed (figures 8b, 8g, 8k, 8l). Presumably what is measured is the
 nearness of the value of the variable to a pre-established criterion level.
Eye movements in everyday life                                                                        1321




saccades ( | ) & fixations

targets of visual fixation
actions and manipulations

time (minutes and seconds)




Figure 7. The specific roles of individual fixations in the first level-2 subtask (`fill the kettle')
shown in figure 3. The pattern of saccades and intervening fixations are shown, and labels are
given to those fixations which appear to have a clear function: for example, fixation on an
object (eg mug, teapot) that will be used later in the process (ˆ `locate'); single fixation on a
location or a part of an object that is immediately followed by an approach of the hand or
object in the hand (ˆ `direct'); fixationöoften multipleöon or between two objects (eg kettle
and lid) that are approaching each other (ˆ `guide'); fixation at a location where the state of
some variable (eg water level) can be assessed (ˆ `check'). Multiple fixations are made on every
object while it is being manipulated (the exception is the kettle switch at 0.42 which only
requires one fixation), but gaze rarely strays from the current object of attention.



                                                                 Figure 8. Examples of fixation patterns
                                                                 drawn from the eye-movement video-
                                                                 tape. Sequences of successive fixation
  0.05.2 ^ 0.08.8            0.23.0                              positions are indicated by numbers
(a)                          (b)               0.25.0 ^ 0.28.0   on the figures, and single fixations by
                                                                 single black dots. Numbers beneath
                                               (c)
                                                                 each figure refer to timings in figure 3.
                                                                 10 deg scale in centre applies to all
                                                                 figures. (a) Initial examination of kettle.
                                                                 (b) Tap control via water stream.
                                                                 (c) Fitting lid to kettle (drawing made
                                                                 at fixation 4). (d) Moving kettle to
  0.37.1                     0.59.0
                                               1.51.0 ^ 1.53.0   base: base is fixated. (e) Hand being
(d)                          (e)                                 directed to the tea-caddy. (f ) Search
                                      10 deg   (f)
                                                                 around the inside of fridge 2. The tea-
                                                                 making milk is located at fixation 5.
                                                                 (g) Fixations checking the switch and
                                                                 gauge of the kettle when waiting for
  2.23.2 ^ 2.25.6            2.47.8 ^ 2.49.4                     it to boil. (h) Selecting a mug. Hand
                                               3.09.5 ^ 3.12.1   goes to fixation 4. (i) Relocating sweet-
(g)                          (h)                                 ener prior to use requires 3 fixations.
                                               (i)               Sweetener last seen 68 s earlier.
                                                                 ( j) Replacing sweetener 5 s after (i).
                                                                 Location on shelf is fixated first.
                                                                 (k) Swirling teapot: checking spout.
                                                                 (l) Pouring tea: receiving vessel fixated.
  3.15.5                     3.21.1            3.45.0
(j)                          (k)               (l)
1322                                                              M Land, N Mennie, J Rusted




    About another 25 fixations seem to be concerned with objects in similar ways to
the 32 identified, although the links are less clear. Most of the remainder appear to be
exploratory in the sense that they examine parts of objects that are not directly involved in
actions (figure 8a). These proportions were similar for the other two subjects. During
search behaviour many fixations are made to objects that are not subsequently
involved in the overall task, and others are simply en passant stops made as gaze
moves rapidly from one part of the scene to another. Overall, however, one has the
strong impression that most eye movements are closely and purposefully linked to the
ongoing actions. The oculomotor system clearly has a set of well-rehearsed and efficient
strategies that enable the eyes to seek out the information required in the performance
of every stage of the tea-making task.
5.3 Relocating objects
How does the eye find the next object to be dealt with in the overall sequence? In a
number of instances that object had already been located some time earlier, so that,
given perfect place memory, it should have been possible for gaze to be redirected to
that object in a single saccade. This seemed to happen only for nearby objects and
those that been fixated in the very recent past. For other objects it seemed that a two-
stage process was involved, with place memory providing a coarse position, and local
recognition completing the process. For example, when the milk was relocated at 2.58
(figure 3), having been first found at 1.52, the eyes and hand first went to the wrong
fridge (at 2.53) and it took a total of 14 saccades from the time of the first relevant
body movement before the milk was found.
    The box of sweeteners was more easily found. This had been located twice during
undirected searches (at 1.44 and 2.02 in figure 3) before being contacted and used (3.10)
68 s later. In fact, the final return at 3.10 was not quite exact (figure 8i): the eyes made a
large (70 deg) saccade up from the counter, landing just below the shelf (i) followed
by a saccade to the support (ii), and a final 18 deg saccade which landed accurately on
the sweetener container (iii). In this case it seems that remembered coordinates were
adequate to get the target within range of central vision, which was then able to complete
the action using an appropriate search image. Interestingly, when the sweeteners were
put back on the shelf, after an interval of only 5 s, gaze preceded their return to the
exact point on the shelf from which they had come (figure 8j). This suggests a fast-
decaying spatial memory of considerable initial accuracy. These initial observations
suggest that a more complete analysis of all instances of returns to pre-located objects
will be useful in exploring the interactions between place memory and direct visual
detection.
5.4 What is not fixated?
The eyes cannot fixate everything relevant to the immediate task, and there appear to
be some definite rules for determining which objects are viewed, and which are not.
Three such rules are as follows.
1. The hands themselves are rarely fixated. If the hand is to contact an object, then
that object is fixated, often at or close to the point of intended contact (figures 8e, 8h).
Frequently, gaze has moved to a new object before the final part of the hand's trajec-
tory is complete, so that the hand itself may not be fixated at all. Presumably, once
direction and range are established visually, mechano-sensory information (propriocep-
tion and touch) are adequate to guide the hand to its target.
2. Objects that the hand has made contact with are rarely fixated again. For example,
contact between the left hand and the cold tap (0.15; figure 3) is made while the taps
are fixated, but thereafter, until the tap is finally turned off 10 s later, gaze is directed
entirely at the water stream into the kettle (figure 8b). Interestingly, the water flow to
Eye movements in everyday life                                                        1323




the kettle from the tap is altered several times in this period, as the kettle fills, but
this is done without further visual reference to the tap.
3. Manipulation of certain familiar objects can be accomplished with no visual involve-
ment at all. For example, after the teapot has been encountered and lifted at 0.52
(figure 3), the lid is contacted with the left hand and lifted from the pot while the eyes
are looking around the room, as the body turns from one counter to another. In this
and the previous example it appears that touch on its own is adequate to accomplish
the task, without visual corroboration.

6 Discussion
6.1 The monitoring role of the eyes
The most surprising feature of the eye-movement record was the extent to which the
eyes guide and monitor the performance of almost every component of the overall
activity (see figures 8b ^ 8e, 8j ^ 8l). In tea-making, though not necessarily in all other
activities, these monitoring actions could be divided into those concerned with finding
objects or manipulating them (`locating', `directing', and `guiding'), and `checking',
where the state of some feature of an object (such as the water level) is measured. We
have seen (figure 7) that about one third of all fixations could be clearly identified
with the performance of one or other of these monitoring actions, and many other
fixations were more loosely associated with them. It was possible to be sure about this
because of the precision with which the eyes were directed. Objects that were about to be
manipulated were nearly always foveated, with the centre of gaze moved, by a saccade, to
within a degree or two of the appropriate part of the object or point in the scene. It was
clear that the eyes do more than just register the scene passively in the manner of a
camera; they seek out the places where the information they obtain will be of most
value. Ballard et al (1993) described eye-movement strategies in a block-copying task as
`do-it-where-I'm-looking', and this epitomises the relationship between vision and
action during tea-making.
    The acts involved in a well-rehearsed activity like tea-making are generally regarded
as having become automatic, that is their performance requires little or no supervision
by higher, more conscious mechanisms (Norman and Shallice 1986; Underwood and
Everatt 1996). This corresponds well with the subjective impression of the performance
of the tea-making task; it seems to require very little conscious involvement for its
successful completion, and one can indeed think about other matters whilst making
tea. While this is perhaps less true in the present unfamiliar kitchen than in one's own
kitchen, a novel environment (for such a familiar activity) will affect only the ease and
speed of location of objects, and not the fluidity of the actions performed upon them.
What we have found here is a large amount of detailed monitoring of actions, of which
subjects were not consciously aware. Every component action was accompanied by
appropriate visual feedback of some kind (figure 7), and this feedback is important.
Closing the eyes at certain moments would öfor a normally sighted personöbe disas-
trous. A distinction is sometimes made between new activities that require closed-loop
control, in the sense that the performance of individual components requires much
individual checking, and automated activities where the control is open-loop, via memory,
minimising the need for feedback (Underwood and Everatt 1996). We have found here that
even highly automated activities involve both checking and closed-loop control. The
difference between new and automated activities thus seems not to lie in the presence
or absence of closed-loop control, but in the extent to which this control is consciously
imposed. This study has shown that when an action has become `automatic', it is not just
the motor acts themselves that have become automated, it is the complete control systems
responsible for their execution, which include sensory elements such as proprioceptors,
touch receptors, and eyes.
1324                                                             M Land, N Mennie, J Rusted




6.2 Natural units of action
Memory for activities such as tea-making is generally assumed to be hierarchically
structured (Brewer and Dupree 1983; van den Broeck 1988; Schwartz et al 1991, 1995)
Individual actions in an event feed into higher-level units, which reflect the goal-
directed nature of these actions. However, it is not clear how these higher-level units
drive the execution of more basic subunits. The `supervisory attention system' (SAS)
of Norman and Shallice (1986) describes a hierarchical model in which high-level schemas
represent and administer overall goals (such as `make the tea') and the subgoals they
comprise (such as `boil the kettle'). These then structure the spatiotemporal pattern of
lower-level schemas such as `fill the kettle', `warm the pot', etc via competitive interac-
tions known as contention scheduling. Lower still are the constituent actions that
execute these low-level schemas. These might be `remove lid', `turn on the tap', and so
forth, which cannot be decomposed further functionally (they have to be completed to
achieve anything) but which may nevertheless each involve a quite complex series of
coordinated muscle movements. In addition to movements of the limbs and trunk, eye
movements relevant to the task are made at rates of several per second. Thus a full
account of an activity might require description at five levels or more. At the time of
their production, are all these levels functional? What are the real sizes of the `auto-
matically activated' schemas?
    In this study we have seen that for the most part the eyes look directly at the object
being dealt with by the hands. Furthermore, the time relations between fixating and
manipulating are quite tight and predictable (figure 4), with vision leading action by
about half a second. Thus for periods of time lasting for a few seconds it appears that
motor and sensory systems are linked to each other via single objects, or sometimes
pairs of objects. The ubiquity of these sensory ^ object ^ action conjunctions leads us
to believe that there is something basic about them in terms of the way the brain
organises behaviour. A somewhat similar conclusion is implicit in the `action coding
system' used by Schwartz et al (1991, 1995), where units that they call A-1s are ``simple
actions that transform the state or place of an entity through manual manipulation''.
This description fits what we are proposing as `object-related actions' (ORAs) rather
well. Indeed we suggest that A-1 units are more than just actions, but, if examined in
detail, would include equally well-defined systems of sensory monitoring, mediated
predominantly, but by no means exclusively, by vision.
    It is harder to define higher-order units of behaviour. Schwartz et al (1991) group
A-1s into more inclusive A-2s, which are related to the subgoal structure of the partic-
ular task (`fill the kettle' describes a goal rather than the actions that achieve it). A-2s
are likened to phrases in which the A-1s are the words, and they are rather similar to
the low-level schemas of the Norman and Shallice (1986) formulation. However, in
contrast to the object-related A-1s, there is nothing very obvious in the record of eye-
movements and actions to distinguish A-2s. The transition from one object-related
action is much the same whether or not a boundary is crossed from one subgoal to
another. There are no obvious pauses as subgoals are achieved: there seem to be no
full stops, although there are plenty of commas.
    A similar conclusion was reached by Barsalou and Sewell (1985) in their analysis
of action-based schemas. Hierarchical organisation may be imposed on the memory
trace, but Barsalou and Sewell, amongst others, have argued that actions which comprise
`scripts' must be sequentially tagged in memory, since these temporal links and not
the subgoals are prominent in verbal reconstruction of the script. In this study we have
shown that higher-order units are not defined in the behavioural sequence either.
    Is this always the case? Although there is the appearance of automaticity in the
production of a routine sequence, there is evidence to suggest that the subgoal units
are discrete and independent and may drive production sequences. Schwartz et al (1991)
Eye movements in everyday life                                                         1325




described two patients with frontal head injuries whose injury resulted in loss of ability
to perform simple routine activities with any degree of accuracy. In addition to gross
object misuse (eg using a razor as a toothbrush) they exhibited severe disorganisation
of level-2 units (subgoals). As recovery proceeded, subgoal organisation normalised.
Subgoal disorganisation of this sort is not observed in the deteriorating performance
of volunteers with Alzheimer-type dementia (Rusted et al 1995).
6.3 What directs gaze?
We have seen that in object-related actions the direction of gaze is very closely connected
with the particular act. There were very few occasions where it seemed that the eyes
were drawn to an object simply because of its `salience' (ie its intrinsic ability to
stimulate early parts of the visual pathway). Objects were fixated because of their
relevance, not because they were big, bright, or visually exciting in other ways. This is
not to deny a role for salience altogether: someone entering the room, for example,
would certainly draw attention away from the task. Nevertheless, where one looks, in
this kind of task where the visual environment is generally static, seems to be driven
principally by the retrieved memory `script' for the activity. There may be a real differ-
ence here between the way eye movements are organised in an unconstrained activity
such as the free viewing of a picture and in a purpose-driven task such as tea-making.
Salience is certainly important in free viewing, as in the famous `Girl from the Volga'
recording of Yarbus (1967), where the eye seems drawn to particular facial features,
but a cognitively driven structure takes over when there is a job to be done öas in
Yarbus's `The Unexpected Visitor', where asking different questions produced radically
different, task-related, patterns of eye movement. Stochastic salience-driven models
may be appropriate for free viewing (eg Harris 1989), but for purposeful activities
something more akin to the program-driven `deictic' models proposed by Ballard et al
(1992), or cognitively driven `scan-path' models (Stark and Ellis 1981; Stark et al 1993)
seem more appropriate (although the early idea that perception occurs as a direct
consequence of the scan path is no part of the present proposal).
6.4 The time scales of eyes and actions
As pointed out by Newell (1990) and by Ballard et al (1998), simple tasks, such as saying
a short sentence or playing a musical phrase, have a time scale of the order of 2 s.
Schleidt (1988) found that spontaneous repeated acts by individuals from four different
cultural backgrounds had modal durations of 3 s. In the block-matching task of Ballard
et al (1982) the average time taken to choose and relocate each block was 1.7 s, and in
a self-paced text-processing task involving a succession of read ^ type ^ check cycles the
average duration of each cycle was 2.3 s (Fleischer and Strauss 1988). Here we find a very
similar time for completing an object-related act (about 3 s, figure 4). It is thus tempting
to think that there is some universality to this figure: that it has something to do with
the intrinsic time scale over which the brain prefers to operate. The timings of all these
tasks inevitably have some element imposed by the nature of the task itself, but it is
more than suspicious that they seem to converge on this particular duration range.
    Watching a videotape of a subject making tea, taken by an external observer, one
sees the various actions merging into each other every few seconds, and this looks
eminently normal. By contrast, the eye-movement video has events (saccades) roughly
every half second (figure 7). It has the frenetic appearance of a movie that has been
greatly speeded up. As a friend of ours, not involved with the study, put it after watch-
ing such a video: ``No wonder I'm tired at the end of the day!'' Whilst we recognise
our actions easily in the observer video, we do not see ourselves as the actors in the
oculomotor drama. This emphasises the fact that we really have no subjective insight
into the way the oculomotor system operates on our behalf. Without our being aware
of it, it employs an impressive knowledge base to superintend the operations that `we'
1326                                                             M Land, N Mennie, J Rusted




are engaged in, and at a speed 5 or 6 times faster than the slow succession of actions
that our consciousness seems to register.
6.5 Unconscious attention?
There is mounting evidence that eye movements and attention are closely linked at a
neurophysiological as well as a psychological level. Attention shifts precede saccadic
eye movements, are associated with their preparation, and involve some of the same
neuronal machinery (Posner and Petersen 1990; Husain and Kennard 1996). Presumably
the eye movements involved in the tea-making task have a similar relation to attention.
However, these eye movements are made unconsciously in the monitoring of an essen-
tially automated activity. In the schema system of Norman and Shallice (1986), auto-
mated activities are controlled by schemas which are ``routine programs for the
control of overlearned skills''. Conscious attention, in contrast, is a feature of the
`supervisory attention system', associated with the frontal lobe of the cortex, which has
the function of handling nonroutine behaviours and intervening when problems arise in
otherwise routine activities. ``It functions by top ^ down activation or inhibition of
schemata'' (Stuss et al 1995).
     Thus there is a problem in knowing whether or not to consider the monitoring
that accompanies automatic and semi-automatic actions as being a kind of attention.
We have no desire to become embroiled in what is already a hugely complicated field,
but it does seem that unconscious monitoring has at least a claim to be considered as
attentive (to the requirements of the task) and thus perhaps a form of attention. It
seems that, even if the subjects themselves are not attending to the task, their oculo-
motor systems are.
     We are probably not saying anything new. Posner and Petersen (1990) argued for
a double system where a parietal attention system is concerned principally with visual
orienting, and a frontal system that is more concerned with purposeful processing. It
is possible that these two systems correspond in some way with the systems we see
here, but this is not yet clear. An involvement of the parietal cortex in routine activities
seems likely, as this is the region where sensory-motor transforms involved in the
planning of action are known to occur (Andersen et al 1997). Nevertheless, the organi-
sation of the overall task is under the control of the prefrontal cortex, as revealed by
the effects of injury to this region (Schwartz et al 1995).
     In summary, the results of this study clearly show that even automated routine
activities require a surprising level of continuous monitoring. The picture we now have
of the sensory-motor program of each ORA is quite complex. Activation of the program
usually occurs on the termination of the previous activity in the low-level schema,
although the variability that we observe between sessions indicates that the execution
of the task is not in any absolute sense a ``stereotypic sequence of actions''. To accom-
modate this, we have suggested that actions are tagged with relational probabilities that
reflect the habitual ordering of a particular subject's routine (Rusted and Sheppard, in
preparation), but that this is not an essentially invariant component of even lower-order
schemas. Once the ORA program is activated, memory must supply the identity of the
relevant object, some information about its location (which may come from long-term
memory in a familiar situation, or very recent memory in a novel one), details of the
motor pattern to be executed, and details of the monitoring arrangements that are needed
for its execution, including the places to which the eyes must be directed to provide the
relevant information. In terms of current neurophysiological thinking (eg Milner and
Goodale 1995) this will involve many parts of the cortex: the frontal lobes for overall
coordination, the parietal lobes for eye ^ hand coordination, the temporal lobes for object
identification, and the hippocampus for place memory. This illustrates the complexity
of the coordination required for even the most overlearned activities.
Eye movements in everyday life                                                                      1327




Acknowledgements. We are grateful to the Wellcome Foundation for support for behavioural
research into everyday routines (JR), and the BBSRC (UK) and the Gatsby Foundation for
funding for the development of the eye-movement monitor (MFL).
References
Andersen R A, Snyder L H, Bradley D C, Xing J, 1997 ``Multimodal representation of space in
    the posterior parietal cortex and its use in planning movements'' Annual Review of
    Neuroscience 20 303 ^ 330
Bahill A T, Adler D, Stark L, 1975 ``Most naturally occurring human saccades have magnitudes
    of 158 or less'' Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science 14 468 ^ 469
Ballard D H, Hayhoe M M, Li F, Whitehead S D, 1992 ``Hand ^ eye coordination during sequential
    tasks'' Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series B 337 331 ^ 339
Ballard D H, Salgian G, Rao R, McCallum A, 1998 ``On the role of time in brain computation'',
    in Vision and Action Eds L R Harris, M Jenkin (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
    pp 82 ^ 119
Barsalou L W, Sewell D R, 1985 ``Contrasting the representation of scripts and categories'' Journal of
    Memory and Language 24 646 ^ 665
Brewer W F, Dupree D A, 1983 ``Use of plan schemata in the recall and recognition of goal-directed
    sections'' Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 9 117 ^ 129
Broeck van den P, 1988 ``The effects of causal relations and hierarchical position on the impor-
    tance of story statements'' Journal of Memory and Language 27 1 ^ 22
Carpenter R H S, 1988 Movements of the Eyes 2nd edition (London: Pion)
Findlay J, 1998 ``Visual activity in everyday life'' Current Biology 8 R640 ^ R642
Fleischer A G, Strauss J, 1988 ``Predictive strategies in eye ^ head coordination during text process-
    ing'' Ergonomics 31 1467 ^ 1475
Furneaux S, 1996 The Roªle of Eye Movements during Music Reading D Phil thesis, University
    of Sussex, Brighton, UK
Harris C M, 1989 ``The ethology of saccades: a non-cognitive model'' Biological Cybernetics 60
    401 ^ 410
Hayhoe M M, Bensinger D G, Ballard D H, 1998 ``Task constraints in visual working memory''
    Vision Research 38 125 ^ 137
Hayhoe M M, Land M F, 1999 ``Coordination of eye and hand movements in a normal visual
    environment'' Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science 40(4) S380 (ARVO Abstract 2005)
Husain M, Kennard C, 1996 ``The role of attention in human oculomotor control'', in Visual
    Attention and Cognition Eds W H Zangemeister, H S Stiehl, C Freksa (Amsterdam: Elsevier)
    pp 165 ^ 175
Jeannerod M, 1988 The Neural and Behavioural Organization of Goal-directed Movements
    (Oxford: Oxford Science Publications)
Land M F, 1993 ``Eye ^ head coordination during driving'' IEEE Systems, Man and Cybernetics
    Conference Proceedings, Le Touquet volume 3, pp 490 ^ 494
Land M F, Lee D N, 1994 ``Where we look when we steer'' Nature (London) 369 742 ^ 744
Land M F, Furneaux S, 1997 ``The knowledge base of the oculomotor system'' Philosophical
    Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series B 352 1231 ^ 1239
Land M F, Mennie N, Rusted J, 1998 ``Eye movements and the roles of vision in activities of
    daily living: making a cup of tea'' Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science 39(4) S457
    (ARVO Abstract 2094)
Milner A D, Goodale M A, 1995 The Visual Brain in Action (Oxford: Oxford University Press)
Newell A, 1990 Unified Theories of Cognition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press)
Norman D A, Shallice T, 1986 ``Attention to action: willed and automatic control of behaviour'', in
    Consciousness and Self-regulation: Advances in Research and Theory volume 4, Eds R J David-
    son, G E Schwartz, D Shapiro (Plenum: New York) pp 1 ^ 18
O'Regan J K, 1990 ``Eye movements and reading'', in Eye Movements and Their Role in Visual
    and Cognitive Processes Ed. E Kowler (Amsterdam: Elsevier) pp 395 ^ 453
Posner M I, Petersen S E, 1990 ``The attention system of the human brain'' Annual Review of Neuro-
    science 13 25 ^ 42
Rayner K, 1995 ``Eye movements and cognitive processes in reading, visual search, and scene per-
    ception'', in Eye Movement Research: Mechanisms, Processes and Applications Eds J M Findlay,
    R Walker, R W Kentridge (Amsterdam: North-Holland) pp 3 ^ 22
Rusted J, Ratner H, Sheppard L, 1995 ``When all else fails, we can still make tea: a longitudinal look at
    activities of daily living in an Alzheimer patient'', in Broken Memories: Case Studies in Memory
    Impairment Eds R Campbell, M A Conway (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers) pp 397 ^ 410
1328                                                                    M Land, N Mennie, J Rusted




Schank R C, Abelson R P, 1977 Scripts, Plans, Goals and Understanding (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
    Erlbaum)
Schleidt M, 1988 ``A universal time constant operating in human short-term behaviour repetitions''
    Ethology 77 67 ^ 75
Schwartz M F, Reed E S, Montgomery M W, Palmer C, Mayer N H, 1991 ``The quantitative descrip-
    tion of action disorganisation after brain damage: a case study'' Cognitive Neuropsychology 8
    381 ^ 414
Schwartz M F, Montgomery M W, Fitzpatrick-DeSalme E J, Ochipa C, Coslett H B, Mayer N H,
    1995 ``Analysis of a disorder of everyday action'' Cognitive Neuropsychology 12 863 ^ 892
Shallice T, 1988 From Neuropsychology to Mental Structure (Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press)
Stark L, Ellis S R, 1981 ``Scanpath revisited: cognitive models direct active looking'', in Eye Move-
    ments: Cognition and Visual Perception Eds D F Fisher, R A Monty, J W Senders (Hillsdale,
    NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum) pp 193 ^ 226
Stark L, Yamashita I, Tharp G, Ngo H X, 1993 ``Search patterns and search paths in human visual
    search'', in Visual Search 2 Eds D Brogan, A Gale, C Carr (London: Taylor and Francis)
    pp 37 ^ 58
Stuss D T, Shallice T, Alexander M P, Picton T W, 1995 ``A multidisciplinary approach to anterior
    attention functions'' Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 769 191 ^ 211
Underwood G, Everatt J, 1996 ``Automatic and controlled information processing: the role of
    attention in the processing of novelty'', in Handbook of Perception and Action volume 2,
    Eds O Neumann, A F Sanders (London/San Diego: Academic Press) pp 185 ^ 227
Viviani P, 1990 ``Eye movements in visual search: cognitive, perceptual and motor control aspects'',
    in Eye Movements and Their Role in Visual and Cognitive Processes Ed. E Kowler (Amsterdam:
    Elsevier) pp 353 ^ 393
Weaver H E, 1943 ``A study of visual processes in reading differently constructed musical selections''
    Psychological Monographs 55 1 ^ 30
Yarbus A, 1967 Eye Movements and Vision (New York: Plenum)




                                                                            ß 1999 a Pion publication
