Human Hand Function
This page intentionally left blank
Human Hand Function




       Lynette A. Jones
      Susan J. Lederman




            2006
           Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that further
                    Oxford University's objective of excellence
                      in research, scholarship, and education.
                                  Oxford New York
             Auckland Cape Town Dares Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
              Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
                         New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
                                    With ofﬁces in
           Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
              Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
             South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
         Copyright © 2006 by Lynette A. Jones and Susan J. Lederman
                    Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
               198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
                                     www.oup.com
          Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
      All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
   stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
          electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
            without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
                Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
                                   Jones, Lynette A.
       Human hand function / Lynette A. Jones and Susan J. Lederman.
                                        p. cm.
                   Includes bibliographical references and index.
                           ISBN-13 978–0–19–517315–4
                                ISBN 0–19–517315–5
       1. Hand—Physiology. 2. Hand—Anatomy. 3. Hand—Movements.
                           I. Lederman, Susan J. II. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Hand—physiology. 2. Hand—anatomy & history. WE 830J775h 2006]
                                    QP334.J66 2006
                              611'.97—dc22 2005018742
                                      987654321
To all those who have worked to unravel the mysteries of the human hand
This page intentionally left blank
                                     ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The ideas and initial planning for this book began in September 2001 during Susan Lederman's sabbatical in the Department of Mechanical
Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. We then collaboratively wrote the book over the next three years, an experience that
proved both rewarding and enjoyable. The work for this book was shared equally, and the order of authorship was decided by the toss of a
coin.
We wish to thank the following colleagues for providing helpful references and graphic materials, for answering the perplexing questions we
posed, or for offering other valuable information: Massimo Bergamasco, Jim Craig, Roz Driscoll, Antonio Frisoli, Yvette Hatwell, Mark
Hollins, Peter Hunter, Gunnar Jansson, Charlotte Reed, Hayley Reynolds, and Allan Smith.
A number of individuals have provided support and assistance with the book's preparation, including Aneta Abramowicz, Catalina Tobon
Gomez, and Lindsay Eng. We would also like to acknowledge the outstanding assistance provided by Cheryl Hamilton and Monica Hurt.
We thank Catharine Carlin, our editor at Oxford University Press, who has enthusiastically supported this project throughout and provided us
with an unusual ﬂexibility, which made writing this book an enjoyable endeavor. We also wish to thank our anonymous reviewers, who offered
thorough, thoughtful, and excellent evaluations of the manuscript.
Lynette Jones acknowledges the support of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the National Institutes of Health's National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke during the preparation of this book. Susan Lederman acknowledges the support of Queen's
University in Kingston, Ontario, Canada; the Canada Council for the Arts, which generously provided a Killam Research Fellowship; the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada; and the Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Systems (Federal Centre of
Excellence of Canada).
Finally, we would like to acknowledge the support of our families. Lynette Jones thanks her husband, Ian Hunter, and children, Nicholas and
Bridget Hunter-Jones, who enthusiastically supported this project, offered encouragement when needed, and were always willing to assist.
Your affection and love are truly sustaining. Susan Lederman wishes to thank her partner, Les Monkman, and his children, Lindsay and Fraser.
Each of you has made a profound difference in my life. Your continuing love, support, humor, and irony are gifts offered most generously,
and I acknowledge them gratefully.
This page intentionally left blank
                                              CONTENTS
1. Historical Overview and General Introduction            3
2. Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand       10
3. Neurophysiology of Hand Function                       24
4. Tactile Sensing                                        44
5. Active Haptic Sensing                                  75
6. Prehension                                            100
7. Non-prehensile Skilled Movements                      116
8. End-effector Constraints                              131
9. Hand Function Across the Lifespan                     150
10. Applied Aspects of Hand Function                     179
11. Summary, Conclusions, and Future Directions          204
References                                               211
Author Index                                             249
Subject Index                                            257
This page intentionally left blank
                               1
          Historical Overview and General Introduction

   [W]e must confess that it is in the human hand that we have the consummation of all perfection as an instrument.
   BELL, 1833
The human hand is a miraculous instrument that serves us extremely well in a multitude of ways. We successfully use our hands to identify
objects and to extract a wealth of information about them, such as their surface texture, compliance, weight, shape, size, orientation, and
thermal properties. We demonstrate impressive manual dexterity when reaching for, grasping, and subsequently manipulating objects within
arm's reach. Manual gestures, such as those used in sign language and ﬁnger spelling, collectively offer valuable forms of communication to
those who are deaf or hearing impaired. In addition, raised tangible graphic displays that are explored by hand provide sensory aids to the
blind when planning how to navigate their environment without a sighted companion. Finally, the human hand serves as a formidable creative
tool in a variety of aesthetic milieus that include dance, sculpture, playing music, and drawing. Depictions of the human hand in art date back
to the Upper Paleolithic era (circa 22,000–28,000 years ago) and can still be seen today in caves at Gargas and El Castillo in the Franco-
Cantabrian region (Napier, 1993; Piveteau, 1991). There is even a museum dedicated speciﬁcally to the hand (La Musée de la Main), which was
established by Claude Verdan, a Swiss hand surgeon, in Lausanne, Switzerland.



Historical Roots
Not surprisingly, the study of human hand function derives its historical roots from multiple sources. From archaeology come the very
detailed analyses of the changes in the anatomy and structure of the hand as it gradually evolved and became capable of using and, more
important, manufacturing tools (Marzke & Marzke, 2000). Zoological and anthropological studies have also focused on the structural aspects
of the hand, although this work has primarily concentrated on the functional use of the hand by various primate species, including Homo sapiens
(Preuschoft & Chivers, 1993). Consideration of these phylogenetic and ontogenetic changes in primate and human hands has led researchers,
particularly during the latter half of the 20th century and at the beginning of the 21st century, to examine how such changes relate to the
development of human hand function over the lifespan.
4                                           Historical Overview and General Introduction

Philosophers and, more recently, experimental psychologists have been interested in the sense of touch for centuries, although their attention
did not focus on manual sensing per se. As early as Aristotle, those interested in touch recognized that this sensory modality was indeed
different from the others (i.e., vision, audition, taste, and smell), a perspective that was maintained throughout the 19th century by individuals
such as Weber (1834/1978), Blix (1884), Goldscheider (1886), and Frey (1896).
Two particularly noteworthy developments of the 19th century that have proved to be of signiﬁcant value to those who study hand function
today derive from the work of Weber and, subsequently, Gustav Fechner. It was Weber (1834/1978) who ﬁrst introduced quantitative
techniques to the study of sensory physiology by measuring both absolute and differential thresholds. He also documented a mathematical
relation between the size of the change in stimulus magnitude and the just noticeable difference in perceived intensity, which came to be
known as Weber's law. Fechner (1860/1966), both a physicist and a philosopher, was interested in offering an alternate interpretation, monism,
to Descartes' mind-body dualism. To do so, he argued that the relation between mental and physical events could be described by a general
quantitative “psychophysical law” that assumed that all just noticeable differences are subjectively equal and that Weber's law is true. Toward
this end, he developed several classical psychophysical methods for measuring sensory thresholds, all of which remain in common use today.
Early tactile concerns centered on issues related to determining the appropriate number of human sensory modalities and submodalities and to
the varying sensitivity and spatial acuity of the skin across the entire human body when stimulated by mechanical and thermal forms of energy.
During the 19th century, anatomists whose names are well known today (e.g., Meissner, Pacini, Krause) showed much interest in using the new
histological techniques of their day to identify the various receptors within the skin. The results of such studies served as the basis for
addressing a third important issue, namely, the links between the receptor populations known at that time and the speciﬁc human cutaneous
sensibility (or sensibilities) that each served. Although the hand was frequently included as a site of stimulation, it was only one among many.
Weber (1834/1978) ﬁrst introduced the well-known two-point touch threshold as a measure of the skin's spatial acuity, a measure that has
subsequently become an important, albeit highly controversial, measure of human hand function. He deﬁned the two-point threshold as the
shortest distance between two contact points that could be perceived as two separate contacts, as opposed to just one. Weber made extensive
measurements of tactile acuity using his own body and that of his brother. In his work, Weber initially employed an instrument known as the
beam compass (or beam trammel), which consisted of a beam with two adjustable connectors that held two steel or pencil points in place at
right angles to the beam. To avoid damage to the skin, these points were further enclosed in cork stoppers borrowed from medicine bottles.
Eventually, Weber switched to using a pair of metal compasses to stimulate the skin. The two points were applied to many places on the body,
including the dorsal and volar regions of the palm and ﬁngers. Weber reported that the normal tactile acuity of the hand improved from the
back of the hand to the palm to the ﬁngertips. Indeed, the ﬁngertips, along with the tip of the tongue, were reportedly the most spatially acute
parts of the body.
Another important focus during the late 19th century was the skin's sensitivity to applied pressure. The German physiologist Max von Frey
(1896) invented two instruments that were used to study pressure sensitivity and the location of “touch” spots on the skin. One device, the
limen gauge, was capable of applying force to the skin at any predetermined rate of loading. The other comprised a graduated series of horse
and human hairs that were mounted in the ends of sticks and used to measure pressure thresholds (Boring, 1942). These instruments have
been employed extensively in studies of pressure sensitivity on the hand over the past 100 years. Indeed, a variant of the von Frey hairs (the
Semmes-Weinstein monoﬁlaments) is still in use today.
Much of this early sensory research focused on the tactile sensitivity of a passive subject; however, there was also considerable interest at the
same time in understanding the perception of weight (Weber, 1834/1978) and other aspects of what was called the “muscular sense.” This
term fell into disuse in the early 20th century and was replaced by proprioception, a term coined by Sherrington (1906), and kinesthesis, a
concept introduced by Bastian (1887).
                                            Historical Overview and General Introduction                                                          5

Proprioception was deﬁned as the sense subserved by receptors in muscles, tendons, and joints and in the labyrinth, part of the vestibular
apparatus. The concept of kinesthesis included sensory information arising from receptors in the skin, muscles, and other deep structures of
the limbs, such as tendons and joints. Bell (1826) was the ﬁrst to postulate the existence of the muscular sense, which he considered to be at
parity with the other senses. That is, he regarded it as a sixth sense, although he did not think that muscles were the exclusive site of peripheral
sensations (Sherrington, 1900a). The muscular sense was considered to include three classes of sensations: pain and fatigue, weight and
resistance, and movement and position. In his 1833 treatise on the hand, Bell noted that “without a sense of muscular action or a
consciousness of the degree of effort made, the proper sense of touch could hardly be an inlet to knowledge at all.” (p.193). He argued that
both muscle and cutaneous sensations must be involved in perceiving the distance, size, form, weight, hardness, and roughness of objects.
This indicates a very early recognition of the functional role played by sensors in the skin and muscles in what is now called active haptic
processing. These ideas were elaborated further by Sherrington (1900b) in his chapter on cutaneous sensations in Shäfer's Textbook of Physiology.
In this chapter, Sherrington made the important distinction between active touch, in which the touch sense is related to a series of “muscular
sensations,” and passive touch, in which an object is allowed to move over a series of tactual points (Phillips, 1986).
The origin of sensations governing the awareness of the forces generated during muscular contractions was fervently debated during the latter
part of the 19th century (e.g., Bastian, 1887; Lewes, 1879). In these discussions, a distinction was made between sensations arising in the
periphery and sensations of innervation, which were of central origin. Many physiologists and psychologists of the period, including Helmholtz
and Wundt, believed that innervation of the motor tracts during voluntary movements produced sensations within the brain. These sensations
of innervation were thought to form the basis of the awareness of muscle force and were called a sense of effort. The idea of sensations of
innervation declined in popularity, however, with Bastian, Ferrier, and Sherrington all supporting Bell's concept of the muscular sense with its
emphasis on peripheral sensations. The notion that internally generated motor signals might have perceptual consequences did, however,
reemerge in the 20th century with the work of Sperry (1950) and Holst (1954), who used the terms corollary discharges and efference copy,
respectively, to describe internal signals that arose from centrifugal motor commands and that inﬂuenced perception.
From the perspective of human hand function, studies of the muscular sense elucidated two important ﬁndings. First, in his research on
weight perception, Weber (1834/1978) observed, as was subsequently conﬁrmed by other investigators (e.g., Ferrier, 1886), that although
weight discrimination is precise with touch alone (i.e., tactile sensing), it is always more exact if the weight is lifted by the hand (i.e., active
haptic sensing). The ability to discriminate between weights of different mass by voluntary muscular exertion was termed a sense of force
(Frey, 1914) and was considered one of the essential elements of the muscular sense. The second observation relates to the degree of
sensitivity of different joints in the hand and arm in detecting movements. In 1889, Goldscheider published the results from a series of
carefully executed experiments in which he measured the movement detection thresholds for various joints while attempting to exclude
cutaneous sensations of pressure as much as possible. He found that the thresholds for detecting both active and passive movements were
much smaller for more proximal joints, such as the shoulder, as compared to the distal ﬁnger joints. This proved especially true for slower
movements. In interpreting these ﬁndings, he noted that the speed of natural movements of a joint is related to the lever arm over which that
joint acts; hence, slower movements are more characteristic of proximal rather than distal joints. Goldscheider's results also showed that there
is a well-developed capacity to detect movements passively imposed on the limbs, and so it seemed unnecessary to resort to a concept of
sensations of innervation to explain movement perception.
Following the more common examples set by 19th-century investigators interested in internal tactile sensations as opposed to those interested
in muscular sensations, the study of touch in the ﬁrst half of the 20th century focused primarily on tactile sensing by passive (stationary)
observers (Boring, 1942; Geldard, 1972). The observer's unmoving hand (and other body sites) was stimulated with a variety of punctuate
instruments, some blunt, some sharp, others warm or
6                                           Historical Overview and General Introduction

cool, all in the service of assessing the sensitivity and spatiotemporal acuity of the observer's tactile, thermal, and pain experiences. In keeping
with Fechner's signiﬁcant move away from the dualistic mindbody philosophy of Descartes, these researchers also began to explore the
functional relation between numerically assessed sensory magnitudes of perceptual events and their corresponding physical magnitudes. In
addition to this behavioral approach, which used psychophysical methodologies, neurophysiologists began to uncover corresponding
relationships between the magnitude of the neural activity of cutaneous ﬁbers in nonhuman observers (usually primates) and the
corresponding magnitude of the physical stimulus (e.g.. Werner & Mountcastle, 1965). Although not the focus of the current book, the study
of nonhuman primates has also contributed signiﬁcantly to our knowledge of how the brain controls the hand.
During the early to mid-20th century, only three individuals—David Katz (1925/1989). Geza Révész (1950), and James J. Gibson (1962.
1966)—stand out for their uncommon emphasis on the critical importance of active, voluntary manual exploration. The focus of their
research was on the perception and recognition of external objects and their physical properties rather than on subjective internal tactile
sensations. Katz offered a wealth of fascinating and critical observations regarding the sense of touch and how it functions, both in
comparison to and in concert with vision and audition. He regarded the hand, as opposed to the skin with its atomistic tactile receptors, as the
primary organ for touch. His comprehensive work on the perception of texture, or microstructure, is truly impressive and offers a striking
contrast to the historically more common focus on shape, or macrostructure. For example. Révész was particularly interested in form
perception by hand as opposed to by eye and to this end proposed a previously unrecognized tactual mode of experience known as haptics.
Using his background in philosophy and aesthetics, he offered a theory of haptic form perception, which in turn led him to carefully observe
blind individuals as they manually appreciated or created three-dimensional sculptures. He questioned the possibility that the blind can ever
possess a meaningful aesthetic appreciation of plastic works of art. an issue we will revisit later. J. J. Gibson continued the pioneering work of
Katz and Révész, highlighting the fact that hands are used to explore and to alter the environment, thus serving both perceptive and executive
functions simultaneously. He too critically emphasized the importance of the hand and the haptic system for actively gathering information
about the external world. As the works of these three individuals have become better known, particularly those of Gibson, they have led to a
surge of scientiﬁc and applied interest in haptic sensing as formally deﬁned below, since the early 1990s.
There is a parallel and complementary evolution of research that focuses on the natural actions of the hand. As described above, much of the
early experimental research in the motor ﬁeld focused on the muscular sense. This reﬂected the belief that it was involved in the regulation of
voluntary motor activity and was also probably motivated by the success of psychophysical procedures in the study of vision, audition, and
touch (Granit. 1981). Early neurophysiological research on the motor system in the 19th century was also dominated by studies of reﬂexes, a
concept ﬁrst formulated by Descartes in the mid-17th century. The development of anatomical techniques and methods for physiological
experimentation during the 19th century contributed to an understanding of the sensory and motor structures involved in spinal reﬂex
pathways. At this time, the role of sensory inputs in the control of voluntary movement was conclusively demonstrated by Mott and
Sherrington (1895). They showed that when the dorsal roots in the brachial region of the spinal cord (C4–T4) of monkeys were unilaterally
transected (i.e., dorsal rhizotomy), the animals made no voluntary movements and their affected hands appeared paralyzed, even though
electrical stimulation of the motor cortex elicited movements. More recent studies have shown that many aspects of purposive movement can
indeed be recovered following dorsal rhizotomy if appropriate care and training procedures are followed (Taub & Berman. 1968). Similar
observations had in fact been made by Munk (1909). who described the learning that occurred in monkeys following unilateral deafferentation.
provided that their normal limbs were bound. These animals were trained to open and close their hands, to grip, and to produce a variety of
movements with their deafferented arms.
During this period in which the focus of motor research was on reﬂex pathways, there are isolated examples of studies on human movements,
such as Bryan and Harter's (1899) analysis of the performance
                                            Historical Overview and General Introduction                                                        7

of Morse code operators and the improvement in their skills with training and Woodworth's (1899) and Hollingworth's (1909) monographs on
the accuracy of voluntary arm movements. In his research. Woodworth examined the relation between speed and accuracy in goal-directed
arm movements, a topic that continued to be of interest throughout the 20th century (e.g.. Fitts. 1954: Keele. 1968: Stetson & McDill, 1923).
He was also interested in the contribution of feedback (i.e.. visual, proprioceptive. and auditory) to movement control and in the movement
control processes that result in asymmetries in manual performance. For much of the 20th century, the study of human hand function was
limited to the analysis of simple movements similar to those studied by Woodworth. although there were some notable exceptions, such as
Bernstein and his colleagues, who started their analysis of movements using tasks such as hammering a nail and striking piano keys (Bernstein.
1967). By the later part of the 20th century, an emphasis on more natural movements emerged, in part stimulated by new methods that
enabled the measurement of the kinematic and dynamic features of tasks, such as pointing (Georgopoulos. Kalaska. & Massey, 1981). reaching
(Jeannerod. 1984: Wing & Fraser. 1983). and grasping (Westling & Johansson. 1984).
The scientiﬁc study of human hand function has always been signiﬁcantly impeded by the technological demands inherent in systematically
producing and displaying objects with multiple attributes and in precisely recording behavioral and neural responses. However, some of these
difﬁculties have been surmounted recently by a third research thrust, which focuses on hand function from the perspective of hardware (e.g.,
robotics, haptic displays, recording somatosensory neural responses) and software design (e.g.. virtual environment technology). The goal of
this research is to design and build haptic and multisensory interfaces for remotely exploring and manipulating virtual and real worlds. We note
that it is of critical ergonomic




Figure 1.1. A sensorimotor continuum of human hand function.
importance that these hardware and software systems be built with the capabilities and limitations of the tactile/haptic and motor systems of
the human user carefully considered. For example, software designers who are interested in haptically rendering objects and their properties (e.
g.. shape, size, surface texture, and compliance) in a virtual environment must deliver the types of tactile and haptic cues that the human user
can use effectively. This holds true as well for teleoperator systems that deliver information to the hand(s) of a user who must interact with and
act upon a real remote environment, as in the case of performing telerobotic repairs in space.



A New Conceptual Framework for Human Hand Function
The framework that we have adopted in this book conceptualizes hand function along a continuum that ranges from activities that are
essentially sensory in nature to those that have a strong motor component. Within this sensorimotor continuum, we delineate four categories
in detail, as listed in ﬁgure 1.1. Each of these categories was selected because it represents a comprehensive set of primary manual functions.
Tactile sensing serves to effect contact between the person's stationary hand and a surface or object which may or may not be moving. In
contrast to the active haptic mode, in tactile sensing, the hand is always passive. This type of mode produces a variety of internal, subjective
sensations. Although not typically used to learn about the properties of external objects and surfaces, tactile sensing does provide some
information about certain properties (e.g., surface texture, thermal conductivity), especially when the object or surface is moved across the
skin.
Active haptic sensing serves to effect contact between the person's hand as it moves voluntarily over a surface or object. The term haptic will be
considered in detail later in the book, but in brief, it
8                                            Historical Overview and General Introduction

involves the use of sensory inputs provided by the stimulation of receptors embedded in skin, muscles, tendons, and joints. In contrast to the
tactile mode, the hand is always active. This mode is preferred, if not essential, for identifying objects and extracting more precise information
about their properties.
Prehension refers to those activities in which the hand reaches to grasp an object. Most of these activities involve holding an object in the hand.
The conﬁguration of the grasp is determined by the task objective and so will often change as the task progresses (e.g., reaching to pick up a
pen and then writing with it). Precise and timely completion of the task usually relies on sensory feedback from mechanoreceptors in the hand
and in the muscles controlling movements of the ﬁngers.
Non-prehensile skilled movements refer to a diverse class of activities ranging from the gestures made as part of normal speech or as a substitute for
speech, to the movements involved in depressing the keys on a keyboard. With the exception of pointing and aiming movements, these
activities typically involve all ﬁngers and both hands.



Scope and Contributions
This book surveys normal hand function in healthy humans. It does not attempt to compare tactile and proprioceptive sensory processing
with other sensory systems, nor does it examine the vast literature on how damage to the peripheral or central nervous systems inﬂuences
human hand function. Any comprehensive investigation of human hand function requires the exploration of a wide diversity of disciplines and
research areas, including anatomy, neurophysiology, cognitive science, experimental psychology (including psychophysics), developmental
psychology and gerontology, kinesiology, hand surgery and rehabilitation medicine, haptic software development and robotics, and human
factors/ergonomics. Until very recently, these ﬁelds have tended to function relatively autonomously. To the best of our knowledge, there
exists no single multidisciplinary source that has attempted to integrate these different but complementary research literatures. We therefore
believe the time is now appropriate to provide such a compendium of human hand function.
Our book should be viewed as complementary to several other excellent books on the hand. Most of these may be categorized in terms of one
or two of the disciplines listed above. Typically, each has focused in greater depth on a speciﬁc aspect of the hand, such as prehension
(MacKenzie & Iberall, 1994), handedness and laterality (McManus, 2002), neural control of hand movements (Phillips, 1986; Wing, Haggard,
& Flanagan, 1996), and tactile function (Gordon, 1978). In contrast, Human Hand Function selectively analyzes and synthesizes the results of
fundamental research drawn from a broad range of disciplines that contribute in important ways to our understanding of human hand
function. The book further explores how the results of research drawn from more than one of these disciplines may be applied to real-world
scenarios that require effective use of the hand. In addition, the book considers ways in which other relevant disciplines might broaden a given
ﬁeld by expanding its current perspectives and methodologies.



Organization
Chapter 2 begins by describing the evolution of the hand. It then examines the hand's anatomy, mechanics, and skin structure. Finally, it
considers biomechanical models of the hand.
Chapter 3 considers human hand function from a neurophysiological perspective. It is there that we describe in detail the peripheral receptors
that are embedded in the hand's skin, muscles, and joints and the role of corollary discharges that accompany voluntary movements. We
further address their associated neurophysiological functions and brieﬂy describe the primary somatosensory pathways that arise in the
peripheral receptors and end in the somatosensory cortex.
Chapters 4 and 5 review the performance of a number of manual behavioral tasks that require tactile and active haptic sensing, respectively.
Collectively, these tasks span the sensory portion of the sensorimotor continuum of human hand function presented in ﬁgure 1.1. Topics in
chapter 4 include spatial and temporal tactile sensitivity and resolution, tactile motion, and space-time interactions within somatosensory
processing as they pertain to human hand function. In addition, we address the perception of objects (as opposed to internal sensations) and
their properties, especially those pertaining to material and geometric attributes. Chapter 5
                                           Historical Overview and General Introduction                                                        9

covers topics that include the critical role that hand movements play in recognizing common objects and their raised 2-D outline
representations and in perceiving object properties, and sensory gating with active movement. Finally, we consider the active haptic sensing of
objects and their properties when we use a variety of intermediate links (e.g., rigid probes) between the hand and the external environment.
Chapters 6 and 7 address performance related to prehensile and non-prehensile activities, respectively, which relate to the motor portion of the
sensorimotor continuum (ﬁgure 1.1). In chapter 6, we analyze both reaching and grasping movements and discuss theories of reaching, the
role of visual feedback in these movements, the coordination between grip and load force, the adaptation of grip forces to object properties,
and anticipatory models of grasping. In chapter 7, we discuss pointing and aiming movements, the keyboard skills of typing and piano playing,
issues related to sensory feedback and errors in performance, and the control of movement speed and force in keyboard skills. Finger tapping
is also covered in this chapter.
Chapter 8 addresses the complete sensorimotor continuum in terms of the particular constraints imposed on human performance by using
different parts of the hand. For tactile and active haptic sensing, topics include site of contact, unimanual versus bimanual sensing, and direct
versus remote sensing; for prehension, topics include site of contact, number of digits, bimanual grasping, remote versus direct action; and for
non-prehensile skilled movements, topics include the independent action of individual ﬁngers, the coupling of movements, hand preference,
and bimanual movements.
Chapter 9 adopts a developmental perspective in which we consider what is (or needs to be) known about human hand function across the
entire life-span from birth through old age. Up to this point, we have considered human hand function in terms of fundamental research.
Chapter 10 explores ﬁve application areas for which a sufﬁcient amount of relevant fundamental research has been conducted so that
directions and guidelines can be provided about how to approach problems that may arise in these ﬁelds. In addition, we consider how such
knowledge can be used to guide the ways in which we may potentially improve on manual performance in these domains. The topics covered
include evaluation of hand function and rehabilitation; talking and listening with the hand; sensory communication systems for the blind,
speciﬁcally to display graphic information to the hand and to assist in the manual denomination of banknotes; haptic interfaces; and exploring
art by touch.
Chapter 11 draws some conclusions about human hand function and offers a guide to future research on this fascinating topic.
                            2
       Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the
                          Hand

   For all its primitiveness, the human hand is functionally a highly sophisticated organ. The qualities that elevate it to the peerage lie in the degree of differentiation
   of its musculature, the intricacy of its nerve supply, and its generous representation in the higher centers of the brain.
   NAPIER, 1976


In this chapter, the evolutionary development of the hand is ﬁrst considered in the context of changes in the structure and function of primate
hands. The differences between modern human and nonhuman primate hands are discussed with particular reference to tool use and
manufacture. We then review the basic anatomy of the human hand as reﬂected in its bones, joints, muscles, and the structure of the skin
surface. The sensory and motor innervation of the muscles and skin is described, and ﬁnally we conclude with a brief summary of some of the
biomechanical models of the hand that have been developed.



Evolutionary Development of the Hand
From an evolutionary perspective, there are three major developments in the structure and function of the hand as it evolved from a support
structure for locomotion to an organ devoted to manipulation. First, there is the development of the pentadactyl (ﬁve-ﬁngered) hand with
enhanced mobility of the digits, as compared to its predecessors. Second, claws thinned and moved dorsally to become ﬂat nails and so no
longer provided assistance in holding the body when climbing; this was now accomplished by ﬂexing the digits around a branch or by grasping
a branch between the digits (Schultz, 1969). Finally, there is the development of highly sensitive tactile pads on the volar (palmar) surface of the
digits (LeGros-Clark, 1959). In spite of these advances, the hands of primates have remained primitive in their skeletal structure; indeed, the
primate hand is considered to be more primitive than the foot, face, shoulder, knee, or hip (Napier, 1976). The pentadactyl hand has been
termed “the absolute bedrock of mammalian primitiveness” (Wood-Jones, 1944, p. 19), as it was established more than 350 million years ago
(Mya) in the Devonian period (see ﬁgure 2.1) and is seen in the fossil lobeﬁn ﬁsh Eusthenopteron (Kemble, 1987; Marzke, 1992). The phalangeal
structure of 2–3–3–3–3 has also been a mammalian characteristic since the beginning of the Tertiary period (65 Mya), and the only change in
the structure of the human hand from this ancient scheme is the absence of the os centrale, a small bone of the carpus (wrist) which has fused
with the adjacent scaphoid bone as shown in ﬁgure ﬁngered) hand with enhanced mobility of the digits, as compared to its predecessors.
Second, claws thinned and moved dorsally to become ﬂat nails and so no longer provided assistance in holding the body when climbing; this
was now accomplished by ﬂexing the digits around a branch or by grasping a branch between the digits (Schultz, 1969). Finally, there is the
development of highly sensitive tactile pads on the volar (palmar) surface of the digits (LeGros-Clark, 1959). In spite of these advances, the
hands of primates have remained primitive in their skeletal structure; indeed, the primate hand is considered to be more primitive than the
foot, face, shoulder, knee, or hip (Napier, 1976). The pentadactyl hand has been termed “the absolute bedrock of mammalian primitiveness”
(Wood-Jones, 1944, p. 19), as it was established more than 350 million years ago (Mya) in the Devonian period (see ﬁgure 2.1 (Napier, 1976).
The implication of this evolutionary
                                     Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand                                                   11




Figure 2.1. Skeletons of the hand from a mammal-like reptile (Ophiacodon) to modern Homo sapiens. The hatched bones represent the os
centrale, which has fused with the adjacent scaphoid bone in Homo sapiens. Reprinted from Napier, 1976. Used with permission of the Carolina
Biological Supply Company.
12                                      Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand

record is that the hand evolved early with capabilities that well preceded the cerebral structures required to take advantage of its potential.
A major factor in the evolutionary change in hand use was the development of the opposable thumb, which resulted in a remarkable increase
in the versatility of hand function and promoted the adoption of bipedal locomotion. Opposition involves ﬂexion, abduction, and medial
rotation of the thumb so that the pulp surface can make contact with the terminal phalanges of one or all of the remaining digits. The
articulation of the thumb metacarpal (the proximal bone of the thumb) and the trapezium (a bone of the wrist), in what is known as a saddle
joint, enables the thumb to rotate 45° around its longitudinal axis. This movement of opposition is essential for effective handling and
exploration of small objects and greatly facilitated primate tool use and construction. Not all primates have an opposable thumb; only Old
World monkeys and apes are capable of rotating the thumb, and some primates, such as the colobus and spider monkey, are thumbless
(Napier, 1993). The spider monkey compensates for its lack of manual dexterity by using its prehensile tail to pick up small objects. This is
possible because the skin on the underside of the distal one third of its tail is hairless and is similar in function to the papillary skin on the hand.
Although opposition of the thumb is evident in many Old World monkeys and apes (Napier & Napier, 1985), the extensive area of contact
between the compressible pulps of the thumb and index ﬁnger is a unique human characteristic, as the thumb is positioned more distally and is
longer relative to the index ﬁnger in human as compared to nonhuman primates (Napier, 1961). In addition, human hands are distinctive in
the relative mass of the thumb musculature, which makes up about 39% of the weight of the intrinsic muscles within the hand, as compared to
33% in gibbons and 24% in chimpanzees and orangutans (Tuttle, 1969). Figure 2.2 illustrates various primate hands, including those of the
three larger apes most closely related to humans, namely, the orangutan (Pongo), gorilla, and chimpanzee (Pan). For these primates, the ﬁngers
are so long relative to the thumb that manipulation typically involves the thumb with the lateral surface of the index ﬁnger rather than with the
tips of the ﬁngers (Marzke, 1992).
In the human hand, unlike those of other primates, the distal phalanges have rough horseshoeshaped tuberosities (see ﬁgure 2.3) to which the
soft tissues of the palmar pads are attached. These pads distribute pressure during grasping and allow the ﬁngertips to conform to uneven
surfaces (Napier, 1976; Young, 2003). The pad on the volar surface of the distal phalanx of the thumb is broader in humans than in other
primates and is distinctive in that it is divided into two wedged-shaped compartments. This permits forces that are applied to the ﬁngerpad to
be dissipated more evenly. The proximal compartment is more deformable and mobile than the distal compartment, which allows the soft
tissue to mold around an object so that it is held against the distal pulp (Shrewsbury & Johnson, 1983). The tip pinch between the pads of the
thumb and index ﬁnger that is used to pick up very small objects appears to be a unique human characteristic and is possible because of the
human ability to hyperextend the distal phalanx of the index ﬁnger passively. In many nonhuman primate species, the ﬁngers must be ﬂexed in
order for the tips to meet the tip of the thumb, due to the considerably longer ﬁnger lengths relative to that of the thumb, as can be seen in
ﬁgure 2.2 (Marzke, 1992).
A number of indices derived from the relative projections of various parts of the hand have been used to characterize the structure of different
primate hands (Napier & Napier, 1967). These measures, and in particular the opposability index, which expresses the ratio between the
lengths of the thumb and index ﬁnger (100(total length of thumb/total length of index ﬁnger)), have proven useful in characterizing the
manipulative capacity of different hands. As the lengths of the index ﬁnger and thumb become more similar, the opposability index increases.
In Homo sapiens, this ratio is 60, in the baboon 57–58 (Papio in ﬁgure 2.2), but in the orangutan (Pongo in ﬁgure 2.2) only 40 (Napier, 1993;
Schultz, 1956). The baboon has a high ratio because its ﬁngers are short relative to the metacarpals, presumably as part of its adaptation to
terrestrial digitigrade locomotion. When it walks, the palmar surfaces of its phalanges make contact with the ground and the metacarpals are
hyperextended (Marzke, 1992). Arboreal primates, such as the orangutan and chimpanzee (Pongo and Pan, respectively, in ﬁgure 2.2), have
tended to develop a prehensile forelimb for locomotion from tree to tree, at the expense of having pulp-to-pulp contact between the thumb
and other ﬁngers (Kemble, 1987). However, in their manual activities, captive chimpanzees
                                      Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand                                                     13




Figure 2.2. Right hands of a range of adult primates, all reduced to the same length. Reprinted from Schultz, 1969, with permission of the
Orion Publishing Group.
make extensive use of grips that involve the thumb and lateral surface of the index ﬁnger, which does not require a long thumb (Marzke &
Wullstein, 1996).
There has been a considerable amount of research on the relation between cranial capacity, the morphology of the hominid hand as it evolved,
and the use and construction of stone tools. The discovery in 1960 in the Olduvai Gorge of 1.75 million-year-old fossil hand bones from an
early human ancestor (Homo habilis) at the same level as primitive stone tools led to a debate that has continued for more than 40 years on the
role of tools in the evolution of the human hand (Marzke & Marzke, 2000). The manufacture of speciﬁc tools was preceded by a period of
unmodiﬁed tool use in which objects found in the environment, such as stones, bones, or pieces of wood, were used for obtaining food or
providing protection. It seems likely that tool use, which is evident in many animals, including primates, was followed by a period in which
tools were modiﬁed or adapted to improve their performance. This type of behavior is evident in present-day chimpanzees, who “ﬁsh” for
termites by poking long slender twigs down ﬂight holes to a termite nest and then retracting the twig that is now covered in termites.
Chimpanzees have been observed collecting twigs prior to arriving at a termite nest and removing any small offshoots or branches that would
impede the twig's
14                                    Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand




Figure 2.3. Bones of the hands of a chimpanzee (left) and a human (right). Note the tufts on the distal phalanges in the human hand. Reprinted
from Young, 2003, with the permission of Blackwell Publishing.
movement into the nest (Napier, 1993). From tool modiﬁcation came tool manufacture, in which objects occurring naturally in the
environment (stones) were transformed into tools (hand axes) that had a speciﬁc purpose. This ﬁnal stage required the intellectual capacity for
conceptual thought and is considered to have taken more than 1 million years to emerge in tool users (Wiesendanger, 1999).
It is from analyses of fossil hands associated with various prehistoric tools that an understanding has arisen of how these tools were made and
which species were capable of making them. It appears that a primitive tool culture existed at least 2 million years ago in Tanzania and that
Homo habilis was capable of fashioning stones into useful shapes (Leakey & Lewin, 1977). Studies of contemporary stone tool-making behavior
in both human (New Guinea stone tool makers) and nonhuman primates reveal the patterns of hand use required to make different types of
tools. They indicate that a number of precision grips are used in tool manufacture, but that a ﬁne precision grip between the tips of the thumb
and index ﬁnger is not essential (Marzke, 1997).



Anatomy of the Hand
The basic structure of the human hand can be considered in terms of its bones and associated joints, muscles, and skin. Standard terminology
is used to refer to the various digits and parts of the hand as shown in ﬁgure 2.4. The hand has a dorsal surface, a volar or palmar surface, and
radial and ulnar borders. The palm of the hand is divided into three regions: the thenar mass or eminence that overlies the thumb metacarpal,
the midpalm area, and the hypothenar mass that overlies the metacarpal of the little ﬁnger.


Bones and Joints
There are 27 bones in the hand, with 8 carpal bones constituting the wrist, 5 metacarpal bones in the palm, and 14 phalangeal bones that make
up the digits (2 in the thumb and 3 in each ﬁnger). The carpal bones are arranged in two rows, with the more proximal row articulating with
the radius and ulna in the forearm. The proximal row comprises the scaphoid, lunate, triquetrum, and pisiform, and the distal row, which
articulates with the metacarpals, comprises the trapezium, trapezoid, capitate, and hamate. The metacarpal bones in the palm of the hand
articulate closely with the adjacent carpal bones in the distal row, and these carpometacarpal joints are capable of ﬂexion/extension
movements and radial and ulnar deviation. With the exception of the ﬁrst metacarpal of the thumb, independent motion of these joints is very
limited, but the range of movement increases
                                      Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand                                                       15




Figure 2.4. Volar aspect of the hand and standard anatomical terminology.
from the second to the ﬁfth metacarpal (Kapandji, 1970; Taylor & Schwarz, 1970). The ﬁve meta-carpophalangeal joints (biaxial or condyloid
type) are universal or saddle joints capable of both ﬂexion/extension and abduction/adduction movements (movements away from and
toward the midline of the hand), whereas the nine interphalangeal joints in the digits are hinge joints capable of only ﬂexion and extension. The
three bones in the ﬁngers are known as the proximal, middle, and distal phalanges, and each ﬁnger has three joints, the metacarpophalangeal
(MP), the proximal interphalangeal (PIP), and the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints.
The total active range of motion of a typical ﬁnger is 260°, which is the sum of active ﬂexion at the MP (85°), PIP (110°), and DIP (65°) joints
(American Society for Surgery of the Hand, 1983). The range of active extension at the MP joint varies between people but can reach 30–40°
(Kapandji, 1970). Passive and active ﬂexion of the MP joint increases linearly from the index to the little ﬁnger, and the total active range of
motion of the ﬁngers also increases from the index to the little ﬁnger (Mallon, Brown, & Nunley, 1991). Although there is no passive extension
beyond 0° at the PIP joint, at 30° it is appreciable at the DIP joint, a uniquely human feature, as noted previously. With the exception of the
thumb, the index ﬁnger has the greatest range of abduction/adduction movements at 30°. These movements become difﬁcult, if not
impossible, when the MP joint is ﬂexed due to tautness in the collateral ligaments of the joint. In contrast to the other digits,
16                                     Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand

the thumb does not have a second phalanx and so has only two phalangeal bones and much greater mobility in the carpometacarpal joint, as
described earlier. The carpometacarpal joint of the thumb is described by many authors as a saddle joint with two degrees of freedom.
Although there is considerable axial rotation in addition to ﬂexion/extension and abduction/adduction movements, this is constrained and so
it is not considered a true third degree of freedom (Cooney, Lucca, Chao, & Linscheid, 1981). In total, the human hand, including the wrist,
has 21 degrees of freedom of movement.


Muscles
There are 29 muscles that control movements of the hand, although some of these muscles are divided into distinct parts with separate
tendons, such as the ﬂexor digitorum profundus, which sends tendons to the distal phalanx of all four ﬁngers. If these subdivisions of
multitendoned muscles are counted separately, the number of muscles controlling the hand increases to 38 (Alexander, 1992). Most of the
muscles that control movements of the hand are in the forearm and are known as the extrinsic hand muscles (see ﬁgure 2.5). These long ﬂexor
and extensor muscles of the wrist and ﬁngers take their origin from the bones in the arm, and as they approach the wrist the muscle bellies are
replaced by tendons (Kapandji, 1970). The ﬂexor muscles arise from the medial epicondyle of the humerus in the upper arm or from the volar
surface of the radius and ulna, and they then travel down the inside of the forearm. At the wrist, the ﬂexor tendons pass through the carpal
tunnel bounded dorsally by the carpal bones and on the volar surface by the transverse carpal ligament. The main ﬂexor muscles are the ﬂexor
pollicis longus that ﬂexes the distal joint of the thumb, the ﬂexor digitorum profundus that ﬂexes the DIP joint of each ﬁnger, and the ﬂexor
digitorum superﬁcialis that ﬂexes the PIP joint of each ﬁnger. Flexion of the wrist involves the ﬂexor carpi ulnaris, ﬂexor carpi radialis, and
palmaris longus. It is of interest to note that the palmaris longus muscle is absent in about 15% of the population (Taylor & Schwarz, 1970),
apparently without any functional consequences. It is sometimes used, however, as a donor of tendon graft material in correcting hand
deformities (Taylor, Raj. Dick. & Solomon. 2004).
The extensor muscles take their origin from the ulna and course down the dorsal side of the forearm (see ﬁgure 2.5). The dorsal carpal
ligament guides the extensor tendons at the wrist, where they are arranged in six tendon compartments. The tendons of one of the extensors
(extensor pollicis brevis) and abductors (abductor pollicis longus) of the thumb, which originate in the mid and distal parts of the radius, are in
the ﬁrst dorsal compartment. The second compartment contains the tendons of the extensor carpi radialis longus and extensor carpiradialis
brevis muscles, which insert into the dorsal base of the index and middle metacarpals, respectively. The extensor pollicis longus, which is in the
third dorsal compartment, inserts into the dorsal base of the distal phalanx of the thumb, and the extensor indicis proprius and extensor
digitorum communis, which are the MP joint extensors of the ﬁngers, are in the fourth dorsal compartment. The extensor digiti minimi, which
extends the MP joint of the little ﬁnger, is in the ﬁfth dorsal compartment, and the sixth compartment contains the tendon of the extensor
carpi ulnaris. This muscle inserts into the dorsal base of the ﬁfth metacarpal (American Society for Surgery of the Hand, 1983).
Muscles that take their origin and insertion within the hand are known as the intrinsic hand muscles. There are four groups of these, as shown
in ﬁgure 2.6. The three thenar muscles (i.e., the abductor pollicis brevis, opponens pollicis, and ﬂexor pollicis brevis) cover the thumb
metacarpal and are involved in pronating the thumb, that is, raising the thumb up straight to form a 90° angle with the palm, and in opposing
the thumb to the ﬁngertips. The three muscles of the hypothenar eminence (abductor digiti minimi, ﬂexor digiti minimi, and opponens digiti
minimi) abduct (move the ﬁnger away from the midline of the hand) and ﬂex the little ﬁnger. The four lumbrical muscles ﬂex the MP joints of
the ﬁngers and extend the interphalangeal joints together with the four dorsal and three palmar interosseus muscles, which also adduct and
abduct the ﬁngers. The lumbrical muscles are unique in the human body in that they originate from tendons and not from bone.


Motor and Sensory Innervation
The muscles and skin of the hand are innervated by the radial, median, and ulnar nerves. The radial nerve innervates the extensors of the hand
and the thumb abductor (abductor pollicis longus), and so its primary
                                      Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand                                                      17




Figure 2.5. Extrinsic hand muscles in the forearm. The ﬂexor (left) and extensor (right) muscles are shown separately. Geometric models of
the muscles were created using ﬁnite element geometries that were ﬁtted to anatomical data digitized from the Visible Human data set.
Adapted from from Reynolds, Smith, & Hunter, 2004.
motor function is to innervate the muscles that extend the wrist and metacarpophalangeal joints and that abduct and extend the thumb. The
median nerve innervates the ﬂexors of the wrist and digits, the abductors and opponens muscle of the thumb, and the ﬁrst and second
lumbrical. The ulnar nerve innervates all other intrinsic muscles of the hand. Each of these major nerves branches extensively. The wrist and
hand receive their blood supply from the radial and ulnar arteries, which run parallel to the bones and enter the hand through the ﬂexor
tunnel.
The sensory innervation of the hand is also provided by the radial, median, and ulnar nerves. The radial nerve innervates the radial three
quarters of the dorsum of the hand and the dorsal surface of the thumb. It also supplies sensibility to the dorsal surfaces of the index and
middle ﬁngers and the radial half of the ring ﬁnger, as far as the proximal interphalangeal joint of each ﬁnger. The median nerve innervates the
volar surfaces of the thumb, index, and middle ﬁngers and the radial side of the ring ﬁnger. Dorsal branches of the nerve arise to innervate the
dorsal aspect of the index and middle ﬁngers distal to the proximal interphalangeal joint and the radial half of the ring ﬁnger. The ulnar nerve
innervates the little ﬁnger and the ulnar half of the ring
18                                     Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand




Figure 2.6. Four main groups of intrinsic muscles in the hand. Geometric models of the muscles were created using ﬁnite element geometries
that were ﬁtted to anatomical data digitized from the Visible Human data set. Adapted from Reynolds et al., 2004.
ﬁnger on the palmar surface as well as the dorsal aspect of the hand over the ring and little ﬁnger metacarpals, the dorsum of the little ﬁnger,
and the dorso-ulnar half of the ring ﬁnger (American Society for Surgery of the Hand. 1983).
The exact pattern of sensory and motor innervation does vary considerably across individuals. For example, the entire ring ﬁnger and ulnar
side of the middle ﬁnger may be innervated by the ulnar nerve, or the whole ring ﬁnger may be innervated by the median nerve. The index
linger appears to be the only digit whose volar surface is always supplied by the median nerve. Similarly, the little ﬁnger is invariably innervated
by the ulnar nerve (Önne. 1962). These variations need to be taken into account when there is injury to a major nerve innervating the hand.
From the perspective of the functional use of the hand, the median nerve is the most important in that it conveys information from a large
area of skin on the palmar surface of the hand and innervates the intrinsic muscles controlling the thumb.


Structure of the Skin
The skin on the volar surface of the hand is described as “glabrous.” in contrast to hairy skin, which is found on the dorsal surface of the hand.
The skin on the volar aspect is relatively thick and is capable of bending along the ﬂexure lines of the hand when objects are grasped. These
folds enhance the security of the grasp and demarcate the areas of the hand where the skin is mobile as compared to the adjacent areas that are
tightly bound to the underlying tissue and bones. The skin is tethered by librillar tissue that connects the deep layers of the dermis with the
sheaths of the ﬂexor tendons. Papillary ridges are found on the palm of the hand and occur on those areas involved in grasping, where it is
assumed that they act as friction pads (Napier. 1976). In contrast to the volar surface, the skin on the dorsum of the hand is thin, soft, and
pliable. When the ﬁngers are ﬂexed, the skin opens out along the tension lines (Langer's lines), and when the hand is relaxed the
                                       Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand                                                       19

skin recoils and accumulates as the transverse wrinkles evident over the phalangeal joints.
All skin consists of two major subdivisions: epidermis and dermis. The epidermis is the outermost layer, which is responsible for the
appearance and health of the skin. It also provides a protective barrier to prevent the loss of moisture and intrusion of bacteria and houses free
(unencapsulated) nerve endings. The skin of the hand contains numerous eccrine sweat glands that keep the skin damp and assist in
controlling body temperature through evaporative heat loss.
We show the structure of glabrous skin and the location of the mechanoreceptor endings in ﬁgure 2.7, although we reserve discussion of the
structure and function of these mechanoreceptors until chapter 3. On the glabrous skin of the hand, the epidermis is composed of ﬁve
sublayers: from outer to inner layer, these are the stratum corneum, the stratum lucidum (particularly evident in the thick palmar skin), the
stratum granulosum, the stratum spinosum, and the stratum germinativum (ﬁgure 2.8).




Figure 2.7. Vertical section through the glabrous skin of the human hand schematically depicts the two major divisions of the skin (epidermis
and dermis) and the underlying subcutaneous tissue. The locations of the organized nerve terminals, which are discussed in detail in chapter 3,
are also shown. Mr = Meissner corpuscle; M1 = Merkel cell neurite complex; R = Rufﬁni ending; P = Pacinian corpuscle. Reprinted from
Johansson & Vallbo, 1983, with permission of Elsevier Biomedical Press.
The cells in the stratum germinativum reproduce by subdividing. They subsequently migrate toward the surface while progressively
dehydrating and ﬂattening in shape. With increasing age, this layer thins, making it more difﬁcult to retain water. In young people, the newly
generated cells take about 28 days (37 days for persons over the age of 50) to travel from the stratum germinativum to the stratum corneum.
During cell migration, the cells ﬁll with a granular substance known as keratin. The outermost layer, known as the stratum corneum or
corneum layer, which varies in thickness from 0.2 to 2 mm, contains ﬂattened, dry cells of soft keratin that are tightly bound together and
sloughed off. Indeed, it has been suggested that about 80% of all house dust consists of these dead skin cells.
The second major layer of skin, the dermis, is shown in ﬁgure 2.7. It consists of only two sublayers (not shown): the papillary (upper) and
reticular (lower) layers (Thomine, 1981). The dermis is normally ﬁve to seven times thicker than the epidermis and makes up 15–20% of the
total body weight (Montagna, Kligman, & Carlisle, 1992). The dermis serves two primary functions: ﬁrst, it nourishes the epidermis through
its extensive network of blood vessels and capillaries; second, the dermis is composed of collagen and elastin and reticular ﬁbers which form a
strong supportive structure. The elastin ﬁbers, which are concentrated in the lower layer of the dermis, give the skin its elasticity. Elasticity
declines with increasing age. Within the dermis's ﬁbrillar network are found encapsulated nerve endings, such as the Meissner corpuscles and
Rufﬁni endings that are described in chapter 3, as well as blood vessels and sweat glands.
The epidermis and dermis are interconnected via a series of papillary folds, which give rise to the externally observable ﬁngerprint structure. It
is interesting to note that during contact, droplets of sweat form evenly along the ﬁngerprint ridges, as shown in ﬁgure 2.9. This has led to the
intriguing speculation that during contact, the ﬁngertip skin is softened, rendering it more compliant (Quilliam, 1978). The sweat also increases
friction between skin and surface. In both ways, then, the production of sweat may help to stabilize an object when it is grasped.
A third layer of subcutaneous tissue consisting of fatty tissue lies beneath the dermis (ﬁgure 2.7) and houses the largest of the four
mechanoreceptors, the Pacinian corpuscles, described in chapter 3. This layer,
20                                   Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand




Figure 2.8. Detail of the structure of the epidermis. Reprinted from Geldard, 1972, with permission.




Figure 2.9. Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of ﬁngertip skin. The papillary ridges and the intervening sulci recur at regular intervals. At
short intervals, globules of sweat exude from the summits of the ridges. Quilliam notes that it is possible that the shape and position of the
sweat globules, which are seemingly permanently poised on the ridges, may be artifacts due to the method used to obtain the SEM (human
index ﬁnger; araldite replica, ﬁeld of view 5 mm). Reprinted from Quilliam, 1978, with permission of Pergamon Press.
                                       Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand                                                        21

known as the subcutis or hypodermis, is not formally considered to be a part of the skin and consists of a loose network of connective tissue
bundles and septa, which connects with the dermis and muscles. The primary functions of the hypodermis are thermoregulation, protecting
the underlying tissues against mechanical trauma, and providing a source of energy (Montagna et al., 1992).
The hairy skin on the dorsal surface of the hand is histologically similar to palmar skin, in terms of the layered structure of the epidermis
(Montagna et al., 1992). The epidermis is thinner on the dorsal as compared to the palmar surface and the stratum corneum is only 0.02 mm
thick (Thomine, 1981). The dermis is also thinner and more mobile in dorsal skin, as it lacks the connective and elastic elements that anchor
the palmar skin to the underlying fascial planes. This allows the dorsal skin to stretch considerably with ﬁnger movements, and so as the
middle ﬁnger moves from extension to full ﬂexion, the skin can be lengthened by up to 30 mm. As discussed in chapter 3, it is this stretching
of the dorsal skin during ﬁnger movement that provides an important input to cutaneous mechanoreceptors.



Models of the Hand
Biomechanical models of the forces and moment arms of the tendons and muscles controlling the ﬁngers have been developed from anatomic
and radiographic experiments on cadaverous specimens (Biryukova & Yourovskaya, 1994; Chao, An, Cooney, & Linscheid, 1989; Poznanski,
1974) and from measurements of the external dimensions of the hands (Garrett, 1971). Given the complex anatomical structure of the hand
with 29 independent muscles, ligaments, and tendons and its anatomical and kinematic redundancy, a number of simplifying assumptions have
been made in developing these models. Nevertheless, they have been used to estimate the centers of joint rotation, determine the muscle-
tendon moment arms during angular rotation of the joint (Buford & Thompson, 1987), predict the posture of the hand as it grasps different
sizes of objects (Buchholz, Armstrong, & Goldstein, 1992), and assist in selecting muscles for tendon transfer surgery (Brand, 1985).
The mechanical behavior of the ﬁngers has also been studied in terms of their mechanical impedance, which speciﬁes the static and dynamic
relation between limb movement and an externally applied force. The focus of this research has been to understand what factors inﬂuence the
mechanical impedance of the hand (e.g., joint angle, muscle activation level, velocity of joint movement) and how this in turn affects the
stability and performance of the haptic interfaces that are used for teleoperation (Colgate & Brown, 1994). For the index ﬁnger, the relation
between force and displacement has been well characterized by a second-order linear model for both rapid (Hajian & Howe, 1997) and longer-
term transients applied to the hand (Becker & Mote, 1990). In both of these studies, the stiffness and damping components of the identiﬁed
models increased with ﬁngertip force; for extension movements over the force range of 2–20 N, Hajian and Howe (1997) found that the
damping ratio doubled (on average from 2.2 N s/m to 4.0 N s/m), and the stiffness increased fourfold (from 200 N/m to 800 N/m). This
experiment involved very brief displacement perturbations, and the damping ratios identiﬁed were considerably higher than those reported in
other studies with longer perturbations (e.g., Becker & Mote, 1990), during which reﬂex responses could have contributed to the system's
response. It is therefore predicted that with longer time scales, the ﬁnger would be underdamped, consistent with the behavior of other joints.
The ﬁngertip is essential for haptic exploration of the external world and is the point of contact in the hand for many motor activities, such as
grasping and typing. Any force that is applied at the ﬁngertips is transmitted to the muscles, tendons, and other soft tissues in the hand and
arm. There has therefore been interest in determining how the mechanics of the ﬁngertip contribute to tactile perception and the control of
grasping. Measurements of the contact force and ﬁngertip displacement as individuals tap on a ﬂat, rigid surface (Serina, Mote, & Rempel,
1997) or grasp an object between the thumb and index ﬁnger (Westling & Johansson, 1987) indicate that most of the displacement of the
ﬁngertip pulp occurs at forces of less than 1 N. As can be seen in ﬁgure 2.10, this relation is nonlinear. Due to the curvature of the ﬁngertip, as
the compression increases, there is a larger contact area, and so even at these low forces, the contact area increases rapidly with displacement as
illustrated in ﬁgure 2.10. On the index ﬁnger, the contact area at 1 N is almost 70% of that at 5 N (Serina, Mockensturm, Mote, &
22                                     Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand




Figure 2.10. Relation between the force applied at the ﬁngertip and the area of contact on the tip of the index ﬁnger during grasping (ﬁlled
circles) and between ﬁnger force and the displacement of the index ﬁngertip pulp during contact with a rigid surface (open circles). The force-
contact area data are from Westling & Johansson, 1987, and come from a single participant, and the force-pulp displacement data are from
Serina et al., 1998, and are also from a single participant. Redrawn from Serina et al., 1998. with the permission of the authors and Elsevier.
Rempel, 1998; Westling & Johansson, 1987). At higher forces, the pulp stiffens rapidly from around 3.5 N mm-1 at 1 N to over 20 N mm-1 at 4
N, which mechanically protects the distal phalanx from impact (Serina et al., 1997). These data suggest that it is the characteristics of the pulp
tissues, and not the underlying hard tissues, that determine the force-displacement relation in the ﬁngertip. They also indicate why the ﬁngertip
functions effectively as a tactile sensor at low forces (less than 1 N) in that small changes in force result in a considerable enhancement in
tactile mechanoreceptor activity, due to the increase in contact area. At higher forces, there is only a modest increase in contact area, and so
little additional tactile information is gained (Serina et al., 1998). The effect of ﬁngertip force on tactile perception is discussed further in
chapter 8.
The response of the ﬁnger pulp to forces applied tangential to the skin surface has also been investigated. These tangential forces play an
important role in the control of grasping, particularly when an object begins to slip between the ﬁngers (see chapter 6). Nakazawa, Ikeura, and
Inooka (2000) measured the deformation of the tip of the thumb and middle and little ﬁngers as forces were applied tangentially to the skin
surface, while the contact force was maintained constant at 1.9 N. Using a Kelvin model to represent the dynamics of the ﬁngertips in the
shearing direction, they estimated the stiffness and viscosity as a function of shear force amplitude. At small shear forces of around 0.6–1.2 N,
they found that the stiffness and viscosity were large in comparison to the values obtained at higher shear force amplitudes and that at shear
forces greater than 1.7 N, they remained relatively constant. Nakazawa et al. (2000) also reported that the shear stiffness of the thumb was the
largest of the three digits tested, when the data were normalized for contact area. These ﬁndings suggest that when an object grasped in the
hand is light, the shear deformation of the ﬁngertip is small and that changes in shear stiffness will occur with compression of the ﬁngertip.
A number of models of the ﬁngertip pulp have been developed to predict the force-displacement and force-contact area responses of the
human ﬁngertip during contact with rigid objects. Serina et al. (1998) modeled the ﬁngertip as an inﬂated, ellipsoidal membrane that was
assigned the properties of skin and ﬁlled with an incompressible ﬂuid. They showed that this structural model of the ﬁngertip, which
incorporated
                                      Evolutionary Development and Anatomy of the Hand                                                       23

both its inhomogeneity (i.e., the layered structure) and geometry, predicted the nonlinear force-displacement data from the ﬁngertip well
(Serina et al., 1997). In addition, the model's predictions of contact area closely matched those measured experimentally. However, the model is
limited in that the loading on the ﬁngertip must be quasi-static and applied at a ﬁxed angle. At other angles, the contact area is not circular,
which violates one of the model's assumptions. Srinivasan (1989) modeled the pulp as a two-dimensional, inﬁnite channel ﬁlled with
incompressible ﬂuid that was covered with a ﬂat, elastic membrane. This model predicted the surface deformation of the ﬁngerpad that
matched experimental data from the primate ﬁnger to within 3 mm of the load, but it was limited to line loads. More recently, Dandekar, Raju,
and Srinivasan (2003) have developed a multilayered, 3-D, ﬁnite-element model of the ﬁngertip based on realistic external geometries, which is
able to predict the behavior of mechanoreceptors in the skin. Nonlinear viscoelastic models of soft tissue (Fung, 1993) have also been used to
describe the force-displacement response of the ﬁngertip pulp to a range of compression velocities (Pawluk & Howe, 1999). This viscoelastic
model, which incorporates a force-relaxation function, was able to predict ﬁngertip force from pulp compression during rapid ﬁnger tapping,
such as occurs when typing (Jindrich, Zhou, Becker, & Dennerlein, 2003). Fung's model's parameters were similar to those estimated by
Pawluk and Howe (1999), despite the much greater dynamic loading conditions in the ﬁnger-tapping experiments.
These models of the dynamic response of the human ﬁngerpad to loads have generally been evaluated within fairly restricted experimental
conditions. Due to the complexity of the skin and underlying tissues, which are nonlinear, inhomogeneous, and anisotropic, many assumptions
have been made in developing these models. Nevertheless, from a biomechanical point of view, they have achieved some success in identifying
the critical elements involved in prehension and in maintaining a stable grasp. This research would clearly beneﬁt from better in vivo models of
the glabrous skin of the hand.
The evolution of the hand and its present anatomical conﬁguration provide a framework for understanding the versatility and limitations of
the human hand. Clearly, the development of an opposable thumb resulted in a dramatic increase in the types of tasks that the hand could now
undertake, from exploring small items within the hand to grasping objects between the ﬁngers and thumb. These functions are described in
more detail in chapter 8. However, it is not only the structural elements of the hand that have contributed to its versatility, but also the soft
tissues within the hand and the properties of the glabrous and hairy skin that covers the palmar and dorsal surfaces, respectively. The sensory
mechanoreceptors within the skin are uniquely positioned to provide the central nervous system with information about ﬁnger movements
and the material and geometric properties of objects held within the hand. These receptors are the subject of the next chapter.
                                          3
                           Neurophysiology of Hand Function

   An important conceptual advance of recent years is the understanding that the study of sensory performance by quantitative methods, called Psychophysics, and
   the study of neural events that follow sensory stimuli by the method of electrical recording, called Sensory Neurophysiology, represent only different approaches to
   what are generically the same set of problems. The methods and the concepts of the two can be combined to yield greater insight into those problems than is possible
   with either alone.
   MOUNTCASTLE, 1975


In this chapter, we commence with a discussion of the structure and function of peripheral sensory mechanisms that are relevant to all four
subclasses that collectively deﬁne the hand-function continuum (ﬁgure 1.1). This includes mechanoreceptors and thermoreceptors in the skin,
proprioceptive inputs from muscles and joints, and centrally originating signals known as corollary discharges. Peripheral motor
neurophysiology is not covered in this chapter, as the general principles of motor unit organization and muscle activation are similar in skeletal
muscles throughout the body (see McComas, 1996; Vrbova, 1995). We subsequently describe the primary sensory pathways that project to the
cortex and the principal cortical areas that are involved in processing sensory and motor information involving the hand. We close the chapter
by discussing the nature of cortical sensory and motor representation and plasticity.



Mechanoreceptors: Glabrous Skin

Areas of Controversy
Before describing the different mechanoreceptor-afferent populations and their presumed functions, it is important to highlight several critical
areas of discussion or controversy. First, a good deal of what is known about hand function originally derived from two separate but related
scientiﬁc disciplines, namely, psychophysics and single-unit neurophysiology. It was Mountcastle (1967) who provided the critical impetus to
combine these two experimental perspectives simultaneously within a single organism because they served the same purpose: to understand
sensory performance and its underlying neural mechanisms. At that time, however, it was not possible to perform both techniques within the
same subject. Hence, monkeys were used in the neurophysiological studies and humans in the corresponding psychophysical research. It was
assumed that “what monkeys and humans feel with their hands is in principle the same, and that neurophysiological observations made in the
one may with some validity be correlated with psychophysical measures in the other, given the precise experimental design in the two cases”
(Talbot, Darian-Smith, Kornhuber, & Mountcastle, 1968, p. 301).
It is important to highlight the fact that while the structure and function of their nervous systems are highly similar, there are also differences
that may
                                                   Neurophysiology of Hand Function                                                            25

alter perceptual function in humans and monkeys in meaningfully different ways. In the next section, we will discuss in detail the four
mechanoreceptor populations that are present in the glabrous skin of humans. For now, we merely note that while one of these
mechanoreceptor populations, slowly adapting type II (SA II), has been reliably identiﬁed in the human hand using microneurography (Vallbo
& Johansson, 1978), it has never been observed in neurophysiological studies with monkeys (Johnson, 2001). Another difference between
human and monkey hands relates to the location of the Pacinian corpuscle mechanoreceptors. These are concentrated near nerves and blood
vessels in the metacarpophalangeal (MP) region of the human cadaver hand (Stark, Carlstedt, Hallin, & Risling, 1998), as opposed to the
thenar and hypothenar areas in monkey hands (Kumamoto, Senuma, Ebara, & Matsuura, 1993). The functional consequences, if any, of
differences such as these have rarely been investigated.
Second, for well over a century now, investigators have argued over the relationship between various cutaneous afferent ﬁbers and their
receptor endings. A number of different methods have been used to address this issue, including histology, single-unit recordings,
immunoﬂuorescence labeling, and even to some extent simple logic. Given incomplete evidence pertaining to afferent ﬁber-receptor
associations in human skin, investigators have assumed the existence of several associations based on the available histological and
neurophysiological evidence in animals and humans. Conclusive evidence has only been obtained for the association between the considerably
larger Pacinian corpuscles and fast adapting type II (FA II) afferents.
Third, over the past several decades, researchers in the ﬁelds of neurophysiology and psychophysics have become interested in determining
the nature of the codes that the nervous system uses to represent human somatosensory sensations and percepts. Until about the middle of
the 20th century, the two disciplines worked separately but in parallel on complementary facets of this problem. Whereas neurophysiological
studies focused on the relation between the physical stimulus (physical events) and the responses of single afferent units (neural events),
psychophysical studies focused on the nature of the psychophysical law, that is, the mathematical function describing the relation between the
physical stimulus (physical events) and human tactual sensory experiences (mental events). More recently, investigators have tried to relate
these two branches in their attempt to understand how the somatosensory system represents human perceptual experience. However,
problems do arise because in many cases the neurophysiological research has been based on animal models and often on the responses of
anesthetized animals (e.g., monkey, cat, raccoon, mouse), whereas the psychophysical work has been based on the responses of alert humans.
One interesting attempt to bridge the gap was developed in Sweden in the late 1960s, when investigators combined two techniques,
microneurography (recording from a single afferent unit) and microstimulation (stimulation of the same afferent), within an attentive human
observer (e.g., Knibestöl & Vallbo, 1970; Maceﬁeld, Gandevia, & Burke, 1990; Vallbo, 1995).
The manner in which the somatosensory system represents sensory experiences is a matter of some controversy. One approach advocates a
feature-detector model, in which a speciﬁc population of tactile units is responsible for encoding a speciﬁc feature, such as roughness, softness,
curvature, orientation, slip, skin stretch, or vibration (see Connor & Johnson, 1992; Dodson, Goodwin, Browning, & Gehring, 1998;
Goodwin & Wheat, 1992; Johansson & Westling, 1987; LaMotte & Srinivasan, 1987a, 1987b; Talbot et al., 1968). An alternate class of model
has argued for a multichannel approach to human sensation in which multiple information-processing channels with overlapping sensitivities,
each one mediated by its own neural mechanism, simultaneously encode the physical stimulus continuum (e.g., the multichannel model of
vibratory sensation proposed by Bolanowski, Gescheider, Verrillo, & Checkosky, 1988). We will discuss some aspects of these approaches in
greater detail.


Types of Mechanoreceptors
Tactile sensing activates a variety of tactile units, each consisting of an afferent ﬁber and its (presumed) ending. There are four different types
of endings in the glabrous skin of the human hand: Merkel cells, Meissner's corpuscles, Rufﬁni endings, and Pacinian corpuscles. Merkel cells
are located in clusters within the basal layer at the tip of the deep epidermal folds that project into the dermis. Meissner's corpuscles are ovoid
structures that are also somewhat superﬁcially located, speciﬁcally at the epidermal'dermal junction
26                                                 Neurophysiology of Hand Function

in the dermal papillary ridges. Rufﬁni endings are spindle-shaped structures that are located more deeply within the connective tissue of the
dermis. Pacinian corpuscles are multilayered, onion-shaped structures that are large enough to be visible to the naked eye. They are located
deep within both the dermis and the subcutaneous fat layer that lies below the dermis. The four types of endings can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1.
Four separate populations of tactile afferents have been documented in the glabrous skin of the human hand (e.g., Knibestöl & Vallbo, 1970;
for valuable summaries, see Johansson & Vallbo, 1983; Johnson, 2001; Vallbo & Johansson, 1984). These are known as SA I (slowly adapting
type I; described as SA in the monkey), FA I (fast adapting type I; in the monkey described as RA, or rapidly adapting, and in the older
literature, as QA, or quick adapting), FA II (fast adapting type II; also known as PC or Pacinian in the monkey), and SA II (slowly adapting
type II; never reported in the monkey) afferents. In this book, we adopt the ancient nomenclature used by the author(s) of each study under
discussion. Although all populations respond to mechanical stimulation, they may be differentiated using several criteria. First, each type of
afferent ﬁber is (presumed to be) associated with a speciﬁc type of ending. In human glabrous skin, SA I afferents end in Merkel cell neurite
complexes, SA II afferents in Rufﬁni endings, FA I afferents in Meissner's corpuscles, and FA II units in Pacinian corpuscles.
Microneurography has been used to differentiate and identify the physiological responses of the four types of human cutaneous afferents (e.g.,
Knibestöl & Vallbo, 1970). In this procedure, the nerve is ﬁrst located by palpation or low-intensity electrical stimulation. A recording
microelectrode (an insulated tungsten needle) is then manually inserted into the skin, usually with a pair of isolated forceps. The microelectrode
penetrates the underlying tissue until a nerve fascicle (skin or muscle) is found and impaled. The electrode is then moved in very small
increments until the appropriate activity from a single unit in the nerve is recorded, which may take from a few minutes to an hour (Prochazka
& Hulliger, 1983). The receptive ﬁeld of the speciﬁc tactile unit that has been engaged by the electrode is initially mapped out by exploring the
skin of the hand with a probe. The relative physiological response of the single afferent unit to sustained stimulation is then determined. These
two parameters, relative receptive-ﬁeld size and relative response to sustained stimulation, are the criteria used to identify the type of unit, as
shown in ﬁgure 3.2.
Figures 3.3 and 3.4 should also be consulted in conjunction with the following description of the four mechanoreceptor populations. Figure
3.3 shows the innervation density for each of the four mechano-receptor-afferent




Figure 3.1. Vertical section through the glabrous skin of the human hand (center) schematically demonstrating the structure and locations of
organized nerve terminals found in this area. The Meissner corpuscle and the Merkel cell neurite complex are shown in the expanded drawings
(top left and top right, respectively). Reprinted from Andres & Düring, 1973, ﬁgure 16; and from Iggo & Muir, 1969, ﬁgure 1, with the
permission of the authors, Springer, and the Physiological Society and Blackwell Publishing, respectively. The Pacinian corpuscle and Rufﬁni
ending are shown in the expanded drawings (bottom left and bottom right, respectively). Reprinted from Chambers, Andres, During, & Iggo,
1972, ﬁgure 8, with the permission of the Physiological Society and Blackwell Publishing. The combined ﬁgure was adapted from Vallbo &
Johansson, 1984, with the permission of Springer-Verlag.
                                                   Neurophysiology of Hand Function                                                            27




Figure 3.2. Types of mechanoreceptive afferent units in the glabrous skin of the human hand, classiﬁed on the basis of adaptation and
receptive ﬁeld properties (Knibestöl, 1973, 1975; Knibestöl & Vallbo, 1970). Graphs show the impulse discharge (lower trace) to the
perpendicular ramp indentation of the skin (upper trace) for each unit type. The FA I units are preferentially sensitive to the rate of skin
indentation, whereas the FA II units are highly sensitive to acceleration and higher derivatives. The fast adapting units, particularly the FA II
units, respond not only when the indentation is increased, but also when the stimulus is retracted. The slow adapting units exhibit a sustained
discharge during constant skin indentation in addition to their discharge during increasing skin indentation. The SA I units have a high
dynamic sensitivity and often a rather irregular sustained discharge. The SA II units, on the other hand, have a less pronounced dynamic
sensitivity and a very regular sustained discharge. Often they show a spontaneous discharge in the absence of tactile stimulation. Reprinted
from Johansson & Vallbo, 1983, with permission of Elsevier Biomedical Press.
populations in glabrous skin on the palm and at two different sites on the ﬁnger (see Paré, Smith, & Rice, 2002, for mechanoreceptor
distributions in the distal ﬁngerpads of the monkey). Figure 3.4 shows the receptive-ﬁeld sizes of the mechanoreceptors across the palmar
surface of the hand.
The SA I units are assumed to end in Merkel cell neurite complexes (Figure 3.10) and are densely distributed (i.e., about 1 per mm2; ﬁgure 3.3).
They are particularly sensitive to features of the local stress-strain ﬁeld (Phillips & Johnson, 1981), which render them strongly sensitive to ﬁne
spatial details (e.g., points, edges, bars, corners, and curvature) as opposed to overall indentation. Their receptive ﬁelds are relatively small,
about 2–3 mm in diameter (see ﬁgure 3.4), with local areas within the receptive ﬁeld that are highly sensitive. Relative to the receptive ﬁelds of
the FA I units, their size is minimally affected by increasing the depth of penetration. This implies that human tactile pattern recognition is
independent of contact forces ranging from 0.2 to 1.0 N (Johnson, Yoshioka, & Vega-Bermudez, 2000). SA I spatial resolution is minimally
inﬂuenced by the scanning velocity up to at least 80 mm/second (Vega-Bermudez, Johnson, & Hsiao. 1991). The response of SA I units to
repeated skin indentation is invariant; that is to say, the variability is around 1 impulse/trial, independent of the number of action potentials
elicited (Vega-Bermudez & Johnson, 1999). Given these response characteristics, humans can discriminate form and texture very well. As SA I
units constitute the only population that responds linearly to skin indentations up to about 1500 μm (Blake, Johnson, & Hsiao, 1997), they also
code curvature very well (Bisley, Goodwin, & Wheat, 2000). Humans are able to differentiate curvature without regard to contact force
(normal) (Goodwin, John, & Marceglia, 1991) or contact area (Goodwin & Wheat, 1992), which suggests that like other forms of spatial
pattern, curvature is neurally represented by a spatially distributed, as opposed to an intensive, code. Based on psychophysical data, it has been
suggested that the SA I units are maximally sensitive to very low temporal frequencies of vibrotactile stimulation ranging from about 0.4 to 3
Hz, which usually result in the sensation of “pressure” (Bolanowski et al., 1988). Single-unit recording data have also been obtained with
respect to the SA I unit responses to sinusoidal stimulation across a frequency range of 0.5–400 Hz (Johansson, Landström, & Lundström,
28                                                 Neurophysiology of Hand Function




Figure 3.3. Average density of the four afferent units: FA I (A), SA I (B), FA II (C), and SA II (D) within different glabrous skin areas. Each
dot in the drawings of the hand represents a single sensory unit innervating the skin area. Histograms give the density of innervation in the
following three skin regions: the tip of the ﬁnger, the rest of the ﬁnger, and the palm. Reprinted from Vallbo & Johansson, 1984, with
permission of Springer-Verlag.
1982). When these responses, which were originally reported in terms of number of impulses/cycle, are replotted in terms of the intensity
characteristics of the mechanoreceptor, the low-frequency range of sensitivity of the physiological data resembles the human psychophysical
data (Bolanowski et al., 1988). SA I units in the human ﬁngertip respond to the application of normal force (e.g., Westling & Johansson, 1984).
In addition, when a force is applied to a site on the human ﬁngertip at a 20° angle from the normal, all afferents that are reliably activated (i.e.,
SA I, SA II, and FA I, but not FA II units) respond; however, in most units the responses are broadly tuned to a speciﬁc direction. With
respect to the SA I population, response sensitivity is greatest to tangential force components applied in the distal direction (Birznieks,
Jenmalm, Goodwin, & Johansson, 2001; Goodwin & Wheat, 2004). SA units in the primate ﬁngerpad also show sustained responses to lateral
stretch (Srinivasan, Whitehouse, & LaMotte, 1990).
The FA I units are presumed to terminate in Meissner's corpuscles (ﬁgure 3.1). They are even more densely distributed than the SA I units,
about 1.5 units per mm2 in the ﬁngertip (ﬁgure 3.3). Like the SA I units, their receptive ﬁelds are relatively small, about 3–5 mm in diameter
(ﬁgure 3.4). However, because they respond evenly across their entire receptive ﬁeld, they are poorer at discriminating very ﬁne spatial details.
Although they are insensitive to static contact, they respond well to transient deformation and particularly to the low-frequency vibration
(Johnson et al., 2000) that occurs during initial contact and periods of relative motion between skin and object. FA I units respond to the
application of normal force (e.g., Westling & Johansson, 1984) and are most sensitive to tangential force components in the proximal and
radial directions (Birznieks et al., 2001). In addition, FA I units provide critical feedback for precise grip control (Johansson & Westling, 1984),
in that they detect both actual slip between skin and object and local micro-slips. FA I units also signal forces that act suddenly on an object
grasped in the hand (Maceﬁeld, Häger-Ross, & Johansson, 1996). Based on psychophysical data, it has been suggested that FA I units are
maximally sensitive to vibrotactile temporal frequencies ranging from about 3 to 40 Hz, which produce the sensation of “ﬂutter” (Talbot et al.,
1968). As noted above, the shape of the psychophysical curve for threshold amplitude as a function of sinusoidal frequency is similar to that
obtained for FA I unit responses to sinusoidal stimulation (0.5–400 Hz) by Johansson et al. (1982), when the latter data are replotted in terms
of intensity characteristics (ﬁgure 3.5). We further note, however,
                                                   Neurophysiology of Hand Function                                                            29




Figure 3.4. Receptive ﬁeld size of four types of afferent unit. Each graph indicates the cumulative distribution curves of receptive ﬁeld sizes for
all four unit types, with the relevant function of interest highlighted (dark line). (A, B) The black patches on the drawings of the hand indicate
receptive ﬁelds of 15 FA I units (A) and 15 SA I units (B), as measured with von Frey hairs that provide a force of 4–5 times the threshold
force of the individual unit (based on a total sample of 255 units). Dark curves refer to the FA I (A) and SA I (B) units, respectively. Most of
the ﬁelds are circular or oval, and they usually have a size between 3 mm2 and 50 mm2, which correspond to circular areas of 2–8 mm
diameter. (C, D) The shaded areas in the drawings of the hand illustrate the receptive ﬁelds of two FA II units (C) and four SA II units (D), as
determined by manually delivered taps with a small glass rod and skin stretch, respectively. The locations of the zones of maximal sensitivity
are indicated by dots. With respect to the SA II units (D), the arrows indicate directions of skin stretch, which give rise to an increased
discharge. Dark curves on the graphs indicate cumulative distributions of receptive ﬁeld sizes of the FA II (C) and SA II (D) units, respectively.
Combined ﬁgure adapted from Vallbo & Johansson, 1984.
that the psychophysical function is more sensitive than the neurophysiological function. For a detailed discussion of the cause of the
discrepancy, the reader should consult Bolanowski et al. (1988).
Each FA II unit ends in a single Pacinian corpuscle (ﬁgure 3.1). These units are less densely distributed in the hand than are either SA I or FA I
units (about 350 per ﬁnger and 800 in the palm; ﬁgure 3.3). They also have extremely large receptive ﬁelds, which render the FA II units poor
at discriminating spatial details (ﬁgure 3.4). However they are exquisitely sensitive to transient stimulation, including vibration. For example,
Talbot et al. (1968) showed that the thresholds of some FA II units for sinusoidal stimulation were as low as ˜1 μm at 200–300 Hz. Sensitivity
dropped steeply below about 150 Hz, presumably the result of the low-frequency temporal ﬁltering properties of the Pacinian corpuscle with
its multilayer structure. FA II units are also very important for detecting more remote events, for example, those that occur with hand-held
objects (Johnson, 2001). Based on psychophysical data, it has been suggested that FA II units are maximally sensitive to vibrotactile temporal
frequencies ranging from 40 to >500 Hz, with a maximum sensitivity around 300 Hz, and that they produce the sensation of “vibration”
within that frequency range (Bolanowski et al., 1988). One notable difference between the psychophysical function and the FA II
neurophysiological function directly obtained by Johansson et al. (1982) is that the decrease in sensitivity over the lower frequency range is
steeper for the former than for the latter.
30                                               Neurophysiology of Hand Function




Figure 3.5. Relationship between physiologically measured frequency characteristics for different ﬁber types—(a) RA; (b) PC; (C) SA I; and (d)
SA II—and psychophysically obtained vibrotactile thresholds as a function of frequency for (a) NP I (Bolanowski et al., 1988: 2.5–12 Hz;
Verrillo & Bolanowski, 1986: 12–150 Hz); (b) P (Bolanowski & Verrillo, 1982); (C) NP III (Bolanowski et al., 1988); and (d) NP II
(Gescheider, Sklar, Van Doren, & Verrillo, 1985: 15–150 Hz; Verrillo & Bolanowski, 1986: 100–500 Hz) channels. Neurophysiological data
points are interpolations and extrapolations of the average results presented by Johansson et al., 1982, for selected response criteria: (a) 1
impulse/stimulus; (b) 4 impulses/stimulus; (C) 0.8 impulses/s; and (d) 5 impulses/s. For the P channel (b), an additional physiological curve
(Pacinian corpuscle), which was derived from unpublished results of Bolanowski, 1981, has been plotted. This curve is the average response of
six excised Pacinian corpuscles maintained at 33°C and for a response criterion of four impulses occurring during the central 200 ms of a 300-
ms stimulus burst. Reprinted from Bolanowski, Gescheider, Verrillo, & Checkosky, 1988, with the permission of the Acoustical Society of
America and the authors.
SA II units have never been found in monkey skin (Darian-Smith & Kenins, 1980; Lindblom, 1965), although they have been reliably detected
in the skin of humans (Knibestöl & Vallbo, 1970). Like FA II units, their density is relatively low compared to either the SA I or FA I units
(ﬁgure 3.3; Wu, Ekedahl, & Hallin, 1998). They have long been associated with Rufﬁni endings that are situated within the dermis (ﬁgure 3.1).
However, this traditional view has been challenged by a recent study on the distribution of Rufﬁni endings in the distal phalanx of the human
ﬁnger in three human donors (Paré, Behets, & Cornu, 2003). Using immunoﬂuorescence labeling, Paré et al. found only one presumptive
Rufﬁni corpuscle. They
                                                    Neurophysiology of Hand Function                                                               31

concluded, “[I]t seems unlikely that Rufﬁni corpuscles in human glabrous skin account for all but a small proportion of physiologically
identiﬁed SA II afferents” (p. 265). Paré, Smith, and Rice (2002) have suggested that “clumped” Merkel endings are the terminals of the SA I
units, and further that the elongated “chain” Merkel endings may in fact be the source of the SA II afferent responses. The receptive ﬁelds of
SA II units are about ﬁve times larger and their sensitivity to skin deformation about six times poorer than those of the SA I units (ﬁgure 3.4).
Hence, they are not useful in detecting ﬁne spatial details. Based on human psychophysical data and by a process of elimination, Bolanowski et
al. (1988) have suggested that SA II units are most sensitive to vibrotactile frequencies ranging from 100 to >500 Hz and produce the
sensation of “buzzing” (personal observation; Bolanowski, Gescheider, & Verrillo, 1994). SA II units are two to four times more sensitive than
SA I units to skin stretch (particularly in the proximal direction), as described later in this chapter (Birznieks et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2000).
They contribute to the perception of the direction of object motion and force when an object produces skin stretch (Olausson, Wessberg, &
Kakuda, 2000). Together with muscle spindles (and perhaps joint afferent units), SA II units also play an especially important role in perceiving
hand conﬁguration and ﬁnger position (Edin & Johansson, 1995).



Mechanoreceptors: Hairy Skin
There are ﬁve main types of mechanoreceptors with large myelinated afferents that have been identiﬁed in hairy skin, two of which are slowly
adapting, namely, Merkel cells and Rufﬁni endings, and three that are rapidly adapting. The latter include non-encapsulated hair-follicle
receptors that innervate hairs, ﬁeld units whose histological structure remains unclear, and Pacinian corpuscles (Vallbo, Olausson, Wessberg, &
Kakuda, 1995). These mechanoreceptors and their associated afferent ﬁbers have properties similar to the tactile units described in glabrous
skin (Greenspan & Bolanowski, 1996; Järvilehto, Hämäläinen, & Soininen, 1981). In hairy skin, the SA I receptors are Merkel cells that are
found within the epidermis and are grouped under visible touch domes with each cell receiving a single afferent that innervates many
receptors. The Rufﬁni endings (SA II receptors) are usually found around hair follicles in the dermis. Hairfollicle receptors are usually
identiﬁed by their brisk response to movements of individual hairs and light air puffs, whereas ﬁeld units are not sensitive to hair movements
and are classiﬁed on the basis of their rapidly adapting responses and the multiple spots with high sensitivity found within their receptive ﬁelds
(Vallbo et al., 1995). In contrast to glabrous skin, Pacinian corpuscles are rare in hairy skin and when found are usually in the vicinity of joints,
tendon sheaths, and interosseous membranes (Gandevia, 1996; Zimny, DePaolo, & Dabezies, 1989). There are also unmyelinated (conduction
velocities of about 1 m/s) tactile units in hairy skin, some of which have low thresholds to mechanical stimuli. Their effects within the central
nervous system (CNS) and the role they play in perception have not been fully elucidated as yet (Vallbo, Olausson, & Wessberg, 1999),
although there is some evidence that they are involved in the affective aspects of touch, sometimes termed “limbic touch” (Olausson et al.,
2002).
Neurophysiological studies of large myelinated afferents indicate that RA units on the dorsum of the hand have discrete receptive ﬁelds with
distinct borders and are primarily found close to joints, whereas SA units are more uniformly distributed across the dorsal surface (Edin &
Abbs, 1991). The relative number of SA units is higher in the hairy skin on the back of the hand than in the glabrous skin on the palm
(Järvilehto et al., 1981), and the distinction between SA I and SA II units is not as clear as in glabrous skin (Edin & Abbs, 1991). In addition,
the properties of some SA units in hairy skin differ from those in glabrous skin (Järvilehto et al., 1981). One difference between SA I units in
hairy and glabrous skin is that in hairy skin they are responsive to levels of stimulation that are below human perceptual thresholds
(Harrington & Merzenich, 1970), and they can discharge continuously without eliciting any perceptual response (Järvilehto, Hämäläinen, &
Laurinen, 1976). However, the force thresholds for activating tactile units in hairy skin are similar to those reported for glabrous skin, with SA
II units having the highest thresholds (5 mN) and the ﬁeld units the lowest (0.1 mN) (Edin & Abbs, 1991).
Bolanowski et al. (1994) have suggested that tactile sensations resulting from mechanical (i.e., vibratory) stimulation of hairy skin are
determined by activity in three psychophysically deﬁned channels, each neurally controlled by a separate mechanoreceptor population. Based
on the threshold-frequency
32                                                Neurophysiology of Hand Function

characteristics recorded from afferent ﬁbers arising from mechanoreceptors in the hairy skin of the forearm and the changes in their responses
with variations in skin temperature and contact area, Bolanowski et al. proposed that three channels mediate mechanoreception in hairy skin:
the NPh low channel (non-Pacinian, hairy skin, low frequency), the NPh mid (non-Pacinian, hairy skin, middle frequency), and the P
(Pacinian) channel. The NPh low is mediated by SA II ﬁbers that innervate Rufﬁni endings and is the neural substrate for low-frequency
responses (0.4–4 Hz). The NPh mid channel, which is probably mediated by rapidly adapting hair-follicle receptors, responds to stimulation
frequencies in the midrange (4–45 Hz or 4–150 Hz), depending on contactor area. Finally, the P channel mediates responses to high-frequency
vibrotactile stimulation ranging from about 45 to more than 500 Hz. The responses in this channel are probably mediated by Pacinian
corpuscles located in the subcutaneous tissue. The above results suggest that the capacity of hairy skin to signal mechanical events differs from
glabrous skin, which probably uses four channels, with one channel (P) being considerably more sensitive than any of the channels seen in
hairy skin. The threshold functions for vibratory stimuli measured on the hairy skin of the forearm are an order of magnitude higher than
those recorded on the palm of the hand (Merzenich & Harrington, 1969). This is not only due to variations in the innervation density of the
two types of skin, but also reﬂects differences in the response properties of the mechanoreceptors and possibly in the mechanical coupling of
the skin and stimulator.
Mechanoreceptors in hairy skin respond to mechanical deformation of the skin and also discharge in response to ﬁnger movements, which
typically stretch the loosely connected skin on the dorsum of the hand. The majority of these receptors respond to movements of more than
one joint, as shown in ﬁgure 3.6, with the pattern of skin stretch during ﬁnger movements determining which units respond. SA II units are
particularly responsive to different types of movements around a joint (Edin & Abbs, 1991). Their responses to joint movements are similar to
those of muscle spindle afferents with ﬁring rates up to 50 impulses/second, which is considerably lower than their discharge rates for tactile
inputs, which can be greater than 200 impulses/second (Grill & Hallett, 1995).




Figure 3.6. Number of slowly adapting (SA I and SA II) and fast adapting (FA) units in the dorsal skin of the human hand that responded to
movements of one or more than one joint. The boxes indicate the number and type of units that discharged in response to movement of the
joint indicated. For example, 20 units responded only to movement of the MP joint of the index ﬁnger, whereas 8 units responded to
movements of both the MP and PIP joints; a further 10 units responded to movements of the MP joints of both the index and middle ﬁngers;
and 3 units responded to movements of the MP joint of the index ﬁnger and of the thumb. Reprinted from Edin & Abbs, 1991, with the
permission of the American Physiological Society.
The proprioceptive information that SA II mechanoreceptors provide the CNS is ambiguous with respect to movement direction and
amplitude. However, the ensemble response from a population of SA II receptors on the back of the hand could provide a sensory population
vector that may reliably differentiate individual ﬁnger movements, as Edin (1992) has argued. When these inputs are eliminated following
anesthesia of the skin, there is an impairment in proprioception (Ferrell & Milne, 1989). It has also been shown that when mechanical strain
patterns are imposed on the skin overlying a joint in the absence of any ﬁnger movement, subjects can perceive these as indicating an actual
movement of the joint (Collins & Prochazka, 1996;
                                                 Neurophysiology of Hand Function                                                          33

Edin & Johansson, 1995). Afferent inputs from the skin inﬂuence most levels of the motor system from motoneurons in the spinal cord
(Garnett & Stephens, 1980) to the motor cortex.
In closing this section on mechanoreceptors, we raise the possibility (A. Smith, personal communication, June 2005) that neurophysiologists
may have oversimpliﬁed receptor innervation and function in cases where a one-receptor/one-ﬁber association has been assumed.
Electrophysiological studies have tended to ignore the multiple large- and small-ﬁber innervations of Meissner corpuscles and hair follicles.



Thermoreceptors
During active haptic exploration and object manipulation, information concerning hand movements and the objects contacted is derived from
mechanoreceptors in skin and muscle. Thermal information about objects comes from thermoreceptive afferent units in the skin. There are
two kinds of thermoreceptors, known as cold and warm receptors, both of which are free nerve endings located in the epidermal and dermal
skin layers (Spray, 1986). Cold receptors are more numerous than warm receptors, respond to decreases in temperature over a range of
5–43°C, and discharge most vigorously at skin temperatures of 25°C. In contrast, warm receptors discharge with increasing skin temperature
and reach a maximum around 45°C (Stevens, 1991). When the skin is maintained at a temperature of 30–36°C, no thermal sensation is noted,
although both types of receptor exhibit spontaneous ﬁring. During the course of daily activities, the skin temperature of the hand can span a
range of 20–40°C, but typically remains between 30 and 35°C. The relative distribution of thermoreceptors in glabrous and hairy skin has not
been studied, and so it is not known to what extent differences in thermal sensitivity in different regions of the hand reﬂect variations in
innervation.
There is a fairly abrupt change in the character of thermal sensation to one of pain if the temperature rises above 45°C or falls below 13°C
(Darian-Smith & Johnson, 1977; Havenith, van de Linde, & Heus, 1992; Johnson, Darian-Smith, & LaMotte, 1973). At these extreme
temperatures, thermal information is conveyed by thermal nociceptors, which signal tissue damage. The onset of cold pain, which is associated
with skin temperatures below 14°C is slow, as damage from freezing usually takes time. This is very different from the rapid withdrawal of the
affected body part when the skin temperature rises to 45°C, and damage is imminent.
It has been estimated that the innervation density of cold and probably warm ﬁbers in the area of glabrous skin innervated by the median
nerve in the hand is approximately 50–70 ﬁbers/cm2 (Darian-Smith, 1984; Johnson et al., 1973). Afferent ﬁbers innervating warm receptors
have conduction velocities in the range of 1–2 m/s, which identiﬁes them as unmyelinated ﬁbers. In contrast, the conduction velocities of
afferent ﬁbers innervating cold receptors are much faster at 10–20 m/s, indicating that they are small-diameter myelinated ﬁbers (Darian-
Smith, 1984).



Nociceptors
The skin also possesses myelinated and unmyelinated afferent units known as nociceptors that are selectively sensitive to high-intensity
stimulation of several different energy forms (e.g., electrical, mechanical, chemical, or thermal) that can damage tissue. These units mediate
pain sensations (Lynn & Perl, 1996) and will not be covered in this book.



Muscle Receptors
There are three types of mechanoreceptor in muscle that provide the central nervous system with information about muscle length and force.
Two of these are stretch receptors known as the primary and secondary spindle receptors. They are located in muscle spindles, which are
elongated structures ranging from 4 to 10 mm in length, that are composed of bundles (up to 14) of small intrafusal ﬁbers (Swash & Fox,
1972). The spindles lie in parallel to the extrafusal muscle ﬁbers, the force-generating component of muscle, and attach at both ends either to
extrafusal ﬁbers or to muscle tendons. Each spindle normally has one or two primary sensory receptors innervated by Group la (large
myelinated) afferent ﬁbers and one to ﬁve secondary sensory receptors innervated by Group II afferent ﬁbers, as illustrated in ﬁgure 3.7.
Muscle spindles have their own motor innervation through the fusimotor, or gamma, system, which regulates the sensitivity of the receptors
34                                                 Neurophysiology of Hand Function




Figure 3.7. Schematic illustrations of a mammalian muscle spindle. When the ends of the intrafusal ﬁbers that compose the spindle contract in
response to gamma or beta motor axon stimulation, the central regions are stretched, which causes the primary (Ia) and secondary (II) endings
to discharge. Reprinted from Prochazka, 1996, which was adapted from Kandel, Schwartz, & Jessel 1991. Reprinted with the permission of
McGraw-Hill and Oxford University Press.
and is activated with the skeletomotor system. Some spindles are also innervated by skeletofusimotor, or beta, ﬁbers that project to both
extrafusal and intrafusal muscle ﬁbers (Hulliger, 1984).
The number of spindles in human muscles varies depending on the function of the muscle, and for the hand has been estimated to range from
12 for the abductor digiti minimi, one of the hypothenar muscles, to 356 for the ﬂexor digitorum superﬁcialis (Voss, 1971). When expressed in
terms of the number of spindles per gram of mean weight of adult muscle, higher spindle densities are generally found in muscles involved in
ﬁne movements, such as the distal ﬁnger muscles, and in the maintenance of posture. In contrast to the tactile sensory system, in which higher
densities of mechanoreceptors are clearly associated with superior tactile acuity, for the proprioceptive system, higher spindle densities do not
appear to be associated with superior sensory acuity. There is no evidence indicating a superior acuity for detecting movements and changes in
limb position as one goes from proximal to distal joints. When expressed in terms of the absolute angular rotation of the joint, the ability to
detect movements is in fact better for more proximal joints, such as the elbow and shoulder, than for the distal joints of the hand, as
Goldscheider ﬁrst noted in 1889. This superior performance of more proximal joints is not surprising because they move more slowly than
distal joints, and rotation of these joints results in a larger displacement of the end-point of the limb (the ﬁngertip in the case of the arm) than
the same angular rotation at a more distal joint. If the extent of movement is expressed in terms of changes in muscle fascicle length during
joint rotation, then proximal and distal joints actually give comparable proprioceptive performance, and the distal to proximal gradient in
sensitivity disappears (Hall & McCloskey, 1983).
Muscle spindle receptors are speciﬁcally responsive to changes in muscle length because of their location in muscles. Both primary and
secondary afferents respond to changes in muscle length, but primary afferents are much more sensitive to the velocity of the contraction and
respond more vigorously
                                                  Neurophysiology of Hand Function                                                            35

as the velocity of the stretch increases. Primary afferents are, however, highly nonlinear, and their discharge rates depend on several factors,
including the recent contractile history of the muscle, the length of the muscle, the velocity with which the muscle changes length, and the
activity of the fusimotor system. Secondary afferents demonstrate much less dynamic responsiveness and have a more regular discharge rate
than do primary afferents at a constant muscle length (Prochazka, 1996). They also display much greater (around 50%) position sensitivity
than do primary muscle spindle afferents (Edin & Vallbo, 1990). The higher dynamic sensitivity of the primary spindle receptors is consistent
with the idea that they signal the velocity and direction of muscle stretch or limb movement, whereas the secondary spindle receptors provide
the central nervous system with information about static muscle length or limb position. Figure 3.8 provides a schematic summary of the
discharge rates of primary and secondary spindle afferent ﬁbers during changes in muscle length, with and without fusimotor stimulation. As
can be seen, the discharge rates of these receptors are not simply a function of changes in muscle length but also reﬂect the activity of the
fusimotor system. In order to decode these afferent signals, the central nervous system must have access to information regarding the level of
fusimotor activity so that it can distinguish between changes in discharge rates that are proprioceptively signiﬁcant from those that are the
result of fusimotor activity. It has been proposed that this is accomplished with corollaries of the motor command, which are transmitted to
the sensory centers in the brain (McCloskey, 1981).
The third class of mechanoreceptor found in muscle is the Golgi tendon organ, an encapsulated receptor about 0.2–1 mm long and 0.1 mm in
diameter, normally found at the junction between muscle tendon and a small group of extrafusal muscle ﬁbers. This receptor is therefore “in
series” with a small number (usually 10–20 in human muscles) of extrafusal muscle ﬁbers. It is selectively responsive to the forces these ﬁbers
develop and has little or no response to the contraction of other muscle ﬁbers (Jami, 1992). Because tendon organs are very sensitive to the
inseries forces, most tendon organs in a muscle discharge in all but the smallest contraction. A single Group Ib axon innervates each tendon
organ. In primate muscles, Golgi tendon organs are less numerous and more variable in number than spindle receptors, and some muscles,
such as the lumbrical muscles of the hand, do not appear to have any tendon organ receptors (Devanandan, Ghosh, & John, 1983).
The distribution of tendon organs in a muscle is generally wide enough that every motor unit is included in the activity of the receptors at least
once.




Figure 3.8. Schematic summary of the discharge rates of primary and secondary spindle afferent ﬁbers to muscle length changes that occur
either with or without concomitant fusimotor stimulation. Reprinted from Prochazka, 1996, with permission of Oxford University Press.
36                                                Neurophysiology of Hand Function

This suggests that the summed output of the Ib afferents from the tendon organs provides the central nervous system with an overall measure
of muscle tension (Jami, 1992). The relation between the activity of a single motor unit and an isolated tendon organ afferent in human
muscles is usually nonlinear, and may even be discontinuous, with steps in the frequency of discharge reﬂecting the contraction of individual
motor units (Vallbo, 1974).
Microneurographic recordings have provided valuable information about the activity of muscle receptors during voluntary movements and
have had an important impact on hypotheses regarding muscle spindle function. Recordings from human subjects have shown that the
position sensitivity of spindle receptors in ﬁnger ﬂexor muscles is remarkably low (less than 1 impulse/mm muscle length) and that both
primary and secondary afferents have a low resting discharge and are silent at the muscle length that corresponds to the comfortable resting
position of the human hand (Vallbo, 1974). It has also been shown that the discharge rates of primary and secondary afferents from the ﬁnger
extensor muscles do not differ signiﬁcantly when the joint is actively maintained at different positions, as can be seen in ﬁgure 3.9. The absence
of any position response in the discharge rates of muscle afferents suggests that changes in fusimotor activity compensate for variations in
muscle length (Hulliger, Nordh, & Vallbo, 1982).
There are limitations to the use of microneurography in muscle nerve fascicles, particularly with respect to the range of movement speeds,
amplitudes, and forces that can be studied. Generally, the movements and forces generated are restricted to the lower end of the physiological
range in order to prevent the microelectrode from dislodging and to limit interference from other active units. The low background ﬁring rates
of human muscle spindle afferents (<20 impulses s-1) and the small changes in discharge rates attributed to fusimotor action (<30 impulses s-1)
as compared to recordings made in alert cats have been ascribed to the restricted experimental conditions used in human studies and the
heightened level of alertness of animals in the laboratory environment (Prochazka & Hulliger, 1998).
In summary, muscle spindle receptors and Golgi tendon organs convey information about the length of muscles, the rates at which muscle
lengths are changing, and the forces generated by muscles. This information provides the basis for the perception of the amplitude and
velocity of ﬁnger movements and the static position of the hand. It also enables us to estimate the weight and compliance of objects supported
by the hand. Information about changes in limb position and movement arises from other sensory sources, such as receptors in the skin and
joints. Cutaneous afferents from the hand can reﬂexively affect fusimotor neurons innervating forearm extensor muscles and so make an
indirect, as well as direct, contribution to proprioception (Gandevia, Wilson, Cordo, & Burke, 1994). In addition to these peripheral sources of
proprioceptive information, there is a considerable body of evidence that suggests that central feedback, such as corollary discharges of the
motor outﬂow, provide information that is used both to decode spindle afferent signals and to perceive force (McCloskey, 1981).



Joint Receptors
Several types of receptor are found in and around joint capsules, including Rufﬁni endings, Golgi endings,




Figure 3.9. Response of the primary muscle spindle afferent in the extensor digitorum communis muscle during 1-s periods (upper trace)
when the muscle was held at either a long (muscle length long, ﬁnger ﬂexion) or short (muscle length short, ﬁnger extension) length (bottom
trace). Reprinted from Hulliger et al., 1982, with permission of Blackwell Publishers.
                                                  Neurophysiology of Hand Function                                                          37

encapsulated Paciniform endings, and free nerve endings. Paciniform endings are probably rapidly adapting, like their counterparts in skin,
whereas Rufﬁni and Golgi endings are probably slowly adapting (Zimny, 1988). The distribution of these receptors is nonuniform in a joint,
which may reﬂect the location of stresses during limb movements (Gandevia, 1996). Most articular receptors discharge near the extremes of
joint movement and often are active during both extreme ﬂexion and extension and so do not provide an unambiguous signal related to joint
position (Proske, Schaible, & Schmidt, 1988). Other joint afferents discharge during the midrange of joint movement, and estimates of the
percentages of this class of receptor range from 5% to 18% in various animal species (Ferrell, 1980).
These midrange joint receptors do respond to ﬁnger movements throughout the physiological range of joint rotation and so provide the
central nervous system with some kinematic information (Edin, 1990). However, their capacity to signal the direction of joint movement is
limited, and so it has been proposed that joint afferent input may only be signiﬁcant when muscle spindle afferents cannot contribute to
proprioception (Burke, Gandevia, & Maceﬁeld, 1988). Studies of patients with rheumatoid arthritis who have undergone prosthetic
replacement of the metacarpophalangeal joints in the hand suggest that whatever information is conveyed by joint receptors is adequately
duplicated by other sensory sources. These patients have normal position sense in the absence of joint receptors (Cross & McCloskey, 1973)
and are able to reproduce accurately the amplitude of movements made by ﬁngers with prosthetic joints (Kelso, Holt, & Flatt, 1980).
An anatomical peculiarity of the hand has provided a preparation that has been used in numerous experiments to study the contribution of
joint and cutaneous receptors to proprioception. When the ﬁngers surrounding the middle ﬁnger are all maximally extended and the middle
ﬁnger is ﬂexed, the distal interphalangeal joint of the middle ﬁnger can no longer be voluntarily controlled as its tendon is slack because the
muscles are decoupled from the joint (Gandevia & McCloskey, 1976). When the ﬁnger is positioned this way, only joint and cutaneous
feedback can contribute to proprioception. The ability to detect the direction of applied ﬂexion and extension movements within the midrange
of joint position is impaired with the muscles disengaged, and the residual ability to detect these movements does depend on joint afferent
feedback. Clark, Grigg, and Chapin (1989) found that a local anesthetic block of the ﬁnger joint resulted in a further impairment in the ability
to detect movements imposed on the joint. This indicates that when movement signals from muscle receptors are absent, articular receptors
can provide cues that signal joint movement.



Corollary Discharges
The central nervous system appears to monitor its own activity in producing muscle contractions, and these correlates or copies of the motor
command have been referred to historically as sensations of innervation (Helmholtz, 1866/1925) and more recently as corollary discharges or
efference copies (McCloskey, 1981). The results from a number of experiments suggest that the perception of force is derived centrally from
these internal neural correlates of the motor command and is not based on the activity of peripheral receptors in the muscle (Gandevia, 1996).
Evidence to support this proposition comes from experiments in which it has been shown that as the motor command sent to a muscle
increases, the perceived magnitude of the force of contraction also increases, even when the force exerted by the muscle remains constant
(Jones & Hunter, 1983). This should not be interpreted as dismissing a role for peripheral receptors, such as Golgi tendon organs, in the
perception of force as peripheral afferent activity is still required to indicate that the muscle force generated in response to the motor
command is adequate to perform the task. A further role for corollary discharges is in the decoding of muscle spindle responses. The
discharge rates of muscle spindle receptors are not only a function of changes in the length of the muscle but also reﬂect the activity of the
fusimotor system. The central nervous system therefore needs to distinguish the spindle responses that are a consequence of fusimotor activity
from those that are a result of an external perturbation and that have proprioceptive signiﬁcance.



Sensory Cortical Projections
Sensory information from receptors in the hand and from muscles controlling ﬁnger movements is
38                                                Neurophysiology of Hand Function

conveyed via afferent nerve ﬁbers to the dorsal root ganglion neurons which lie on the dorsal root of a spinal nerve. The cell bodies of these
neurons have two branches, one that projects to the periphery and the other to the central nervous system. The nerve terminals of dorsal root
ganglion neurons determine the function of the neuron. The area of skin innervated by a single dorsal root is known as a dermatome, which
can be identiﬁed in animals by stimulating the skin with different probes and measuring the response from afferent ﬁbers in the dorsal root.
Dermatomal maps are often used as a diagnostic aid for locating the site of injury in humans with damage to the spinal cord or dorsal roots.
The large-diameter axons mediating touch and proprioception diverge from the smaller-diameter afferents subserving temperature and pain in
the spinal cord, and they follow different pathways to the brain. Figure 3.10 depicts these two ascending pathways on a series of brain slices.
The small-diameter ﬁbers terminate on second-order neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, and the axons of these neurons cross the
midline to form the anterolateral system (Gardner, Martin, & Jessell, 2000). The axons serving these two modalities are segregated and are
arranged somatotopically as they ascend the spinal cord. The anterolateral system has both direct and indirect connections to the thalamus via
the reticular formation in the medulla and the pons. From the thalamus, there are projections to the primary somatosensory cortex, the dorsal
anterior insular cortex, and the anterior cingulate gyrus (E. G. Jones, 1985).
Tactile and proprioceptive information is transmitted to the cerebral cortex via the central axons of dorsal root ganglion cells, the ﬁrst-order
neurons, that enter the spinal cord. These axons ascend directly to the medulla through the ipsilateral dorsal columns, in what is known as the
dorsal column—medial lemniscal system. The two sensory modalities are segregated anatomically, with axons from proprioceptors being
located more ventrally in the dorsal columns than are axons from tactile receptors, which are positioned dorsally. Not all of these primary
afferent ﬁbers reach the medulla; some 50% terminate at spinal levels and are known as propriospinal ﬁbers. At higher spinal levels, the dorsal
columns are divided into two fascicles: the gracile fascicle and the cuneate fascicle. The gracile fascicle ascends medially and includes ﬁbers
from the ipsilateral sacral, lumbar, and lower thoracic segments, whereas the cuneate fascicle ascends laterally and contains ﬁbers from the
upper thoracic and cervical segments. Axons in these fascicles terminate in the second-order neurons in the gracile nucleus and cuneate
nucleus in the medulla (Florence, Wall, & Kaas, 1989). From there, they cross to the other side of the brain stem and ascend to the ventral
posterior lateral nucleus of the thalamus in a ﬁber bundle known as the medial lemniscus.
The third-order neurons in the thalamus that receive these inputs from the dorsal column—medial lemniscal system send axons to
Brodmann's areas 3a, 3b, 1, and 2 in the primary somatosensory cortex in the postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe (Paul, Merzenich, &
Goodman, 1972). Most of the thalamic input terminates in areas 3a and 3b, and the cells in these areas then project to areas 1 and 2. There is
also a direct, but much smaller, connection between thalamic neurons and areas 1 and 2. The four areas of the primary somatosensory cortex
differ in terms of the inputs they receive from the thalamus. Sensory information from receptors in the skin is received in areas 3b and 1,
whereas proprioceptive information is transmitted to areas 3a and 2 (Mima et al., 1997). Area 2 sends a signiﬁcant amount of efferent axons to
the motor cortex, and loss of this cortical input has a striking effect on hand function, with impairments in coordinating the ﬁngers when
grasping, even though there is no weakness of the hand nor change in simple ﬁnger movements (Hikosaka, Tanaka, Sakamoto, & Iwamura,
1985). There are extensive interconnections between the primary sensory areas, and they in turn send connections to the secondary
somatosensory cortex on the superior bank of the lateral sulcus (Burton, 2002).
Each of the four areas within the human somatosensory cortex contains a full representation of the body but with different types of
information depicted (Kurth et al., 2000). In addition, parts of the body with higher innervation densities, such as the ﬁngertips and the
thumb, have disproportionately larger areas of cortex devoted to processing their sensory signals (Kaas, Nelson, Sur, & Merzenich, 1981).
These cortical maps of the body surface are dynamic, not static, and are modiﬁed as a function of experience (Buonomano & Merzenich,
1998; Kaas, 1991). It has been shown in monkeys that extensive use (over 3 months) of the ﬁngertips in a
                                                Neurophysiology of Hand Function                                                        39




Figure 3.10. Sensory pathways involved in transmitting information from the hand to the cerebral cortex. The dorsal column medial lemniscal
system transmits proprioceptive and tactile information from the periphery to the thalamus, whereas pain and thermal sensations are
transmitted to the thalamus via the anterolateral system. Reprinted from Gardner et al., 2000, with permission of McGraw-Hill.
40                                                Neurophysiology of Hand Function

task involving touching a rotating disk with the middle ﬁngers to obtain food pellets, results in a signiﬁcant enlargement of the cortical
representation of the stimulated ﬁngers (Jenkins, Merzenich, Ochs, Allard, & Guic-Robles, 1990). Figure 3.11 shows the enlargement of the
cortical territory of the stimulated ﬁnger as compared to its normal territory prior to differential stimulation. In a related human study of the
cortical hand representation of proﬁcient Braille readers, Pascual-Leone and Torres (1993) used transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to
show that the cortical representation of the right index (reading) ﬁnger was signiﬁcantly larger than that of the left index ﬁnger of Braille
readers and of the right index ﬁnger of control subjects. Moreover, representations of parts of the hand that were not involved in reading
Braille were differentially smaller than those of control subjects. These results were conﬁrmed in another study that used magnetoen-
cephalography (MEG) to image the cortical representations of the ﬁngers of string-instrument players (Elbert, Pantev, Wienbruch, Rockstroh,
& Taub, 1995). When playing, these musicians are continuously ﬁngering the strings with the second through ﬁfth digits of the left hand, while
the thumb grasps the neck of the instrument and so is not as active as the other digits. Elbert et al. (1995) found that the cortical
representation of the digits of the left hand of string players was larger than that of controls and that this difference was smallest for the
thumb. In addition, there was a negative correlation between the size of the cortical representation of the ﬁngers of the left hand (as inferred
from dipole strength) and the age at which the person began to play the musical instrument.
In contrast to this expansion of the cortical representation of the ﬁngers with training, when the hand area in the human somatosensory cortex
becomes deafferented as a consequence of extensive peripheral deafferentation (spinal cord injury) or amputation, there is shrinkage in the
area of the cortex devoted to processing information from the hand. In these cases, the cortical representation of adjacent areas expands to
occupy the deafferented cortex (Kew et al., 1997; Ramachandran, 1993). The reorganization that results from deafferentation and training
appears to takes place at a cortical and not a thalamic or spinal level (Garraghty & Kaas, 1991; Wang, Merzenich, Sameshima, & Jenkins,
1995), although there is evidence of alterations in representational maps in dorsal column nuclei after deafferentation (Jain, Catania, & Kaas,
1997). The




Figure 3.11. Cortical representation of the ﬁnger in the adult owl monkey before (normal) and after (stimulation) differential stimulation of the
tip of the index ﬁnger. Outlines of the territories for each of the digits are shown in area 3b of the somatosensory cortex, together with the
area on the ﬁngertip that was stimulated. After stimulation, there was a substantial enlargement of the territory representing the surface of the
index ﬁnger that was stimulated, as shown by the ﬁlled area in the digit 2 representation. Reprinted from Jenkins et al., 1990, with the
permission of the American Physiological Society.
                                                   Neurophysiology of Hand Function                                                             41

mechanisms involved in dynamically allocating cortex to selected peripheral inputs are not fully understood, and many issues, such as the site
of plasticity and the cellular mechanisms that determine synaptic competition, require further study (Buonomano & Merzenich, 1998; E. G.
Jones, 2000).
An interesting illusion that is related to the plasticity of cortical representation has been reported during acute anesthesia of the thumb or lips.
Gandevia and Phegan (1999) observed that following complete anesthesia of the digital nerves that innervate the thumb, the perceived size of
the thumb increased in magnitude by about 60–70%. In addition, the perceived size of the lips also increased (by 55%), even though the
adjacent unanesthetized index ﬁnger did not change in perceived size. A similar result was found when the lips were anesthetized, with the
effect on the thumb being much smaller (an increase in size by 5%), although still signiﬁcant. The latter ﬁnding may reﬂect the fact that the lips
were anesthetized using topical anesthesia, which resulted in a marked but not complete loss of sensory function, unlike the digital nerve block
that eliminated all sensory feedback from the thumb. This experience of increased size following anesthesia is often reported by people who
have had dental anesthesia and feel that their lips and lower face are “swollen.”
The sensory representations of the thumb and lips are anatomically close in subcortical and cortical sites, and some cells respond to inputs
from both the thumb and lips, so it is not surprising that changes in sensory inputs affected both body parts. The absence of any effect of
thumb anesthesia on the perceived size of the index ﬁnger is surprising, however, and suggests that the boundaries between the thumb and lip
representations are less distinct than those between the thumb and index ﬁnger (Gandevia & Phegan, 1999). The increase in perceived size
with anesthesia has been interpreted as resulting from the unmasking of sensory inputs to the primary somatosensory cortex and the
enlargement in the size of the receptive ﬁelds of cortical cells representing skin areas adjacent to the anesthetized region, as has been shown to
occur in monkeys (Calford & Tweedale, 1991). These illusory increases in size appear to be related to the extent of the area that is anesthetized,
as they do not occur when the whole arm is anesthetized (Melzack & Bromage, 1973). In this situation, the somatosensory cortex devoted to
the anesthetized region becomes “silent.”



Motor Cortical Areas
The areas of the cerebral cortex that contribute directly to the control of hand movements include the primary motor cortex (Ml, or area 4),
the supplementary motor area (SMA, or medial part of area 6), the presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA, or part of area 6), and the
premotor cortex (PM, or lateral part of area 6) as shown in ﬁgure 3.12. There is considerable debate about the number of motor areas in the
human brain, and estimates range from a conservative count of four areas to a more liberal estimate of ten areas (Roland & Zilles, 1996). The
motor cortical areas receive inputs from subcortical motor areas, such as the basal ganglia and cerebellum, via the thalamus. Intracortical
microstimulation studies in primates have shown that a large area of the primary motor cortex is involved in controlling the distal muscles of
the contralateral arm (Asanuma & Rosén, 1972; Donoghue, Leibovic, & Sanes, 1992). These studies have also revealed that there are multiple
representations of each muscle and type of movement, and so the same muscle can be activated by stimulation at different foci within the hand
area of the primary motor cortex. In addition, single-unit recordings from neurons in Ml in monkeys show that there is considerable spatial
overlap in the cortical territories for movements of different ﬁngers. This indicates that many cortical motor neurons inﬂuence more than one
ﬁnger muscle and that there are widespread horizontal connections throughout the M1 hand area (Donoghue et al., 1992; Schieber & Hibbard,
1993).
Similar results have been obtained from imaging studies of motor cortex organization in the human brain. Geyer et al. (1996) found two sets
of representations for the thumb and index and middle ﬁngers within primary motor cortex, and Sanes, Donoghue, Thangaraj, Edelman, and
Warach (1995) reported that movement of a single ﬁnger gave rise to several ﬁelds of activation within M1. In the latter study, the
representations of the thumb and index and ring ﬁngers overlapped each other (as deﬁned by the volume of activation) by 40–70%. These
ﬁndings are at variance with the classic motor homunculus derived from electrical stimulation of the cortical surface (Penﬁeld & Rasmussen,
1950; Schott, 1993) and indicate that somatotopy in primary motor cortex may hold only for major divisions of the body, such as the arm,
face, and leg.
42                                                Neurophysiology of Hand Function




Figure 3.12. Major motor areas of the human cerebral cortex, including the primary motor cortex, the supplementary motor area, and the
premotor cortex. The somatotopy of the primary motor cortex is shown with the hand and arm occupying a relatively large area on the lateral
surface. Reprinted from Krakauer & Ghez, 2000, with the permission of McGraw-Hill.
There are additional representations of the hand in the supplementary motor and premotor areas. These nonprimary motor areas are believed
to control different aspects of hand function but to operate cooperatively (Rouiller, 1996). In both human and nonhuman primates, the pre-
SMA is now regarded as an area distinct from the caudally adjacent SMA on both anatomical and physiological grounds (Picard & Strick,
1996; Tanji, 1996). The two areas differ in their anatomical connectivity in that only the pre-SMA receives substantial input from the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and only the SMA projects directly to the primary motor cortex (Tanji, 1996). Studies of neuronal activity in the
pre-SMA in monkeys suggest that this area plays a role in updating the information that is required to perform an upcoming sequence of
movements, and so the neurons in this area are more active during the preparation for upcoming movements (Matsuzaka, Aizawa, & Tanji,
1992; Shima, Mushiake, Saito, & Tanji, 1996). Similar studies in the SMA reveal that it contributes to planning and controlling sequential
movements that have multiple spatial components and in particular to arranging multiple movements in the correct temporal order (Shima &
Tanji, 1998). The results from imaging studies in human subjects are consistent with this distinction in that they have shown that there is
sharply localized activity in the pre-SMA while participants are learning a ﬁnger-sequencing task, whereas the SMA becomes more active
during the performance of these sequential movements (Boecker et al., 1998; Hikosaka, Sakai, Miyauchi, Takino, Sasaki, & Pütz, 1996).
The PM appears to be involved in the planning and control of movements that are guided by sensory information (Roland & Zilles, 1996).
Several lines of evidence from nonhuman primate studies suggest that the ventral premotor cortex can be distinguished from the dorsal
premotor cortex both functionally and structurally. In particular, the ventral premotor cortex participates in the visual guidance of hand
movements, such as those involved in reaching for and manipulating objects (Ochiai, Mushiake, & Tanji, 2005; Wise, di Pellegrino, &
Boussaoud, 1992). Behavioral and imaging studies in both human and nonhuman primates suggest that one role of this cortical area is the
transformation of information about the location of objects in space, which is speciﬁed in an extrinsic visual frame of reference, into an
intrinsic motor reference frame (Kakei, Hoffman, & Strick, 2001). In contrast, the dorsal premotor cortex is involved in movement planning
and the mental rehearsal and observation of motor tasks (Ramnani & Miall, 2004). Many task-related neurons in this cortical area exhibit the
same activity patterns during observation as during performance of a task (Cisek & Kalaska, 2004, 2005).
All of these cortical motor areas project to the spinal cord, and in human and nonhuman primates, a subset of the neurons in the primary
motor cortex, known as corticomotoneuronal cells, send their axons directly to the distal motoneurons that innervate hand and ﬁnger muscles.
About 40% of the axons in the human corticospinal tract originate in the primary motor cortex, and these axons descend through the
subcortical white matter, the internal
                                                  Neurophysiology of Hand Function                                                           43

capsule and cerebral peduncle, until they form the medullary pyramids. This entire projection is therefore often called the pyramidal tract. Only
those ﬁbers constituting the corticospinal tract itself terminate in the spinal cord, and the other (approximately 50%) pyramidal tract ﬁbers
terminate or send collateral branches to a number of supraspinal structures (Davidoff, 1990). The corticospinal tract is the least mature of the
descending motor pathways and, as described in chapter 9, undergoes considerable changes during the early postnatal years.
The contribution of the pyramidal tract, and in particular the corticospinal system, to skilled manual activities has been subject to much debate
and experimentation (Lemon & Grifﬁths, 2005). Early animal experiments emphasized the loss of independent ﬁnger movements that
occurred after complete transection of the pyramidal tract (Lawrence & Kuypers, 1968; Tower, 1940), although other studies showed that,
following intensive retraining, discrete ﬁnger movements were possible after unilateral and bilateral le