                                         MolmoSpaces
                                         A Large-Scale Open Ecosystem for Robot Navigation and Manipulation

                                         Yejin Kim♥1∗      Wilbert Pumacay♥1∗           Omar Rayyan♥3∗           Max Argus♥1∗

                                         Winson Han♥1 Eli VanderBilt♥1               Jordi Salvador♥1         Abhay Deshpande♥1             Rose Hendrix♥1    Snehal
                                         Jauhri♥5 Shuo Liu♥2

                                         Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah4 Maya Guru1 Arjun Guru2 Ainaz Eftekhar2 Karen Farley1 Dono-
                                         van Clay2 Jiafei Duan1,2 Piper Wolters1 Alvaro Herrasti1 Ying-Chun Lee2 Georgia Chalvatzaki5
                                         Yuchen Cui3

                                         Ali Farhadi1,2     Dieter Fox1,2       Ranjay Krishna♥1,2
arXiv:2602.11337v2 [cs.RO] 19 Feb 2026




                                         1
                                          Allen Institute for AI, 2 University of Washington, 3 University of California, Los Angeles, 4 University of California,
                                         Berkeley, 5 Technische Universität Darmstadt

                                         *denotes equal contribution in no particular order. ♥ marks core contributors. See full author contributions here.

                                              Data: Assets and Scenes
                                              Code: https://github.com/allenai/molmospaces
                                              Blog: https://allenai.org/blog/molmospaces



                                             Abstract
                                             Deploying robots at scale demands robustness to the long tail of everyday situations. The countless variations
                                             in scene layout, object geometry, and task specifications that characterize real environments are vast and
                                             underrepresented in existing robot benchmarks. Measuring this level of generalization requires infrastructure
                                             at a scale and diversity that physical evaluation alone cannot provide. We introduce MolmoSpaces, a fully
                                             open ecosystem to support large-scale benchmarking of robot policies. MolmoSpaces consists of over 230k
                                             diverse indoor environments, ranging from handcrafted household scenes to procedurally generated multiroom
                                             houses, populated with 130k richly annotated object assets, including 48k manipulable objects with 42M stable
                                             grasps. Crucially, these environments are simulator-agnostic, supporting popular options such as MuJoCo, Isaac,
                                             and ManiSkill. The ecosystem supports the full spectrum of embodied tasks: static and mobile manipulation,
                                             navigation, and multiroom long-horizon tasks requiring coordinated perception, planning, and interaction across
                                             entire indoor environments. We also design MolmoSpaces-Bench, a benchmark suite of 8 tasks in which robots
                                             interact with our diverse scenes and richly annotated objects. Our experiments show MolmoSpaces-Bench
                                             exhibits strong sim-to-real correlation (R = 0.96, ρ = 0.98), confirm newer and stronger zero-shot policies
                                             outperform earlier versions in our benchmarks, and identify key sensitivities to prompt phrasing, initial joint
                                             positions, and camera occlusion. Through MolmoSpaces and its open-source assets and tooling, we provide a
                                             foundation for scalable data generation, policy training, and benchmark creation for robot learning research.




                                         1    Introduction
                                         Recent advances in robot learning [1–4], have given rise to increasingly general, open-vocabulary policies, capable
                                         of zero-shot deployment. As we work towards generalist robots, it becomes important to consider how to evaluate
                                         and measure the performance of these policies. State-of-the-art models are already nearing saturated performance on
                                         several established tasks, providing little signal to drive further progress [5]. Moreover, most manipulation benchmarks
                                         frequently focus on short-horizon skills in a single scene, failing to probe the long-horizon, compositional challenges


                                                                                                          1
MolmoSpaces                                                               High-Fidelity




                                                                                                          Real-World Success
                                                                          Physics Interaction                             80%

                                                                                                                           60%

                                                                                                                           40%

                                                                                                                           20%

                                                                                                                               0%
                                                                                                                                    0%   20%   40%   60%   80%
                                                                                                             MolmoSpaces-Bench Success




   Robots               130k Objects                   42M Grasps
                                        Asset
                                        Files
                                                                                                                           Comprehensive Benchmark
                                        Text                                                                               Physics Tuning
                                        Descriptions
                                                                                                                           Environment Testing
    Multiple Grippers   Object          Scale &                                                                            Experiment Tooling
    & Embodiments       Model    100g
                                        Mass                                                                               Task Definitions




Figure 1 MolmoSpaces is an open ecosystem consisting of a large number of simulation environments, 3D articulated objects,
and tasks for training and evaluating robot navigation and manipulation at scale. It provides object metadata, grasps, and tooling to
generate training data, create benchmarks, and evaluate policies in a manner that correlates with real-world performance.


that arise in realistic environments [6–11].
The real world presents an extraordinarily long tail of situations a robot must handle. Kitchens vary in layout, lighting,
and clutter. Objects come in countless shapes, sizes, and materials. Instructions can be phrased in myriad ways. A
truly generalist policy must be robust to not just the common cases but to the vast combinatorial space of environments,
objects, and tasks that constitute everyday life. Estimating a policy’s ability to do so requires evaluating on a far broader
distribution of tasks, environments, and objects than ever before.
Simulation offers a compelling path to enable this level of rigor and scale in evaluation. Unlike physical experiments,
which are expensive, slow, and difficult to reproduce, simulation enables systematic assessment across thousands
of controlled scenarios. Rather than testing on a handful of cherry-picked scenarios, we can characterize policy
performance across the full distribution of environments a robot might encounter. However, effective simulation for
mobile manipulation must simultaneously support scene-scale diversity, physical realism, articulated interactions, and
long-horizon compositional tasks in realistic indoor environments. For simulation experiments to be useful, results
in simulation must attain strong correlation with real-world performance [12]. However, existing simulators and
benchmarks remain limited. Many provide only dozens of scenes or objects, lack realistic physics or visuals, or support
a narrow range of tasks.
We introduce MolmoSpaces, an end-to-end large-scale ecosystem for robotics research illustrated in Figure 1. Molmo-
Spaces unifies diverse scenes, objects, tasks, and tools for training and evaluating generalist robot policies. It contains
over 230k diverse indoor environments spanning a wide range of layouts and scene types, which enables evaluation
across the long tail of real-world spatial configurations. It also includes more than 130k high-quality rigid and articulated
object models with rich semantic and physical metadata, which supports assessment of generalization to novel objects.
In addition, MolmoSpaces provides over 42M annotated grasps across 48k interactive rigid and articulated objects,
which offers ground-truth supervision for grasp success evaluation. Our assets and scenes dataset can be loaded into
multiple simulators (MuJoCo [13], IsaacSim [14], and ManiSkill [15]), all backed by high-fidelity physics.
Using this ecosystem, we construct MolmoSpaces-Bench, a new benchmark suite that evaluates robot policies on 8
base tasks–navigate-to, pick, pick-and-place, pick-and-place-next-to, pick-and-place-color, open, close, and open-door
(Sec. 4.1)– in never-before-seen environments, all zero-shot (i.e. with no fine-tuning on benchmark data). Importantly,
the entire MolmoSpaces platform is open-source and extensible. This means that beyond the benchmarks we report,
researchers can leverage MolmoSpaces to synthesize their own datasets of scenes, objects, and tasks for training robust
robotic policies at scale. We hope that by providing a community-driven ecosystem of this scope, we will accelerate


                                                                    2
Feature                   Molmo- Robo- AI2- Habitat iGibson  RL-  Behavior robo- Mani- OPTIMUS LIBERO Mimic-
                          Spaces Casa THOR   2.0      2.0   Bench   1K     mimic Skill 2               Gen
Scenes                     232k    120    –        1        15          1     50       3        –         4         20       1
Objects                    130k   2509   3578     169      1217        28    9318      15     2144       72          –      40
Object Categories          2.8k   153     –       46        –          28    1949       –       –         –         –        –
Tasks                        8    100     –        3        6         100    1000       8      20        10        130      12
Realistic Physics           ✓      ✓      ×        ×        ✓         ✓       ✓        ✓       ✓         ✓         ✓        ✓
Realistic Rendering        (✓)     ✓      ✓        ✓        ×         ×       ✓        ×       ✓         ✓         ×        ×
Muli-Embodiment             ✓      ✓      ✓        ×        ✓         ×       ✓        ×       ×         ✓         ×        ✓
Room-Scale Scenes           ✓      ✓      ✓        ✓        ✓         ×       ✓        ×       ×         ×         ×        ×
Multi-Room Scenes           ✓      ×      ✓        ✓        ✓         ×       ✓        ×       ×         ×         ×        ×
Annotated Object Grasps     ✓      ×      ×        ×        ×         ×       ×        ×       ×         ×         ×        ×
Mobile Manipulation         ✓      ✓      ✓        ✓        ✓         ×       ✓        ×       ✓         ×         ×        ✓
Scripted Datagen            ✓      ✓      ×        ×        ×         ✓       ×        ✓       ✓         ✓         ×        ✓
AI-generated Tasks          ✓      ✓      ×        ×        ×         ×       ×        ×       ×         ×         ×        ×

Table 1 Comparison to popular simulation frameworks used in the robot learning literature. The definition of tasks varies strongly
across papers; many take it to be unique verb-object or category combinations.


progress toward truly general-purpose robotic intelligence.
In zero-shot evaluations (no task-specific fine-tuning), our benchmark distinguishes performance among several state-of-
the-art policies, including VLA models (π-models [1, 2, 16]) and classical modular baselines, across a wide range of
unseen environments and objects. The results reveal steady progress over model generations, but also expose brittleness
to distribution shifts. For instance, we find that minor changes in instruction phrasing or initial robot pose can cause
significant drops in success for some policies, especially earlier-generation VLAs. This sensitivity highlights the
importance of training on more diverse data, which MolmoSpaces can readily supply for future work. Encouragingly,
we observe a strong sim-to-real correlation: policies that score higher in our simulation benchmarks also achieve better
real-world success rates on equivalent tasks (with Pearson R2 ≈ 0.92 for object picking). This validates that high-fidelity
simulation can be a reliable proxy for real-world performance. Moreover, by systematically perturbing scene parameters
and sensor inputs in simulation, we pinpoint specific failure modes (e.g. dependence on certain camera viewpoints and
lighting conditions) that are costly to uncover with physical trials. These analyses demonstrate how an open ecosystem
like MolmoSpaces not only measures overall progress but also yields insights to drive algorithm improvement.
By dramatically expanding the scale of available simulated environments and making them openly accessible, Molmo-
Spaces enables researchers to measure generalization more rigorously than ever before and can support future work in
generating diverse training data for tackling the next generation of robotics problems.


2     Related work
Robot simulation frameworks provide scalable, safe, and repeatable platforms for rapid prototyping, policy learning,
and evaluation. Modern simulators such as MuJoCo, Isaac, and ManiSkill offer high-fidelity physics simulations
that support contact- and force-based manipulation [13–15, 17]. Building on these engines, the research community
has developed a range of simulation frameworks. Projects like AI2-THOR [18], Habitat, and Habitat-Lab [19, 20]
emphasize photorealistic visual navigation, but provide only limited manipulation support, often relying on “magic
grasps” that bypass realistic contact dynamics [18, 21]. RoboCasa and RoboCasa365 [22, 23] build on MuJoCo to
provide single-room environments, synthetic datasets, and task definitions for multi-task manipulation and navigation,
but remain limited in scene and asset diversity.
Large-scale datasets in robotics are increasingly important, as demonstrated by efforts such as Open X-Embodiment [24].
In parallel, the community has pursued data scaling through simulation. Objaverse [25] provides internet-scale 3D assets
compatible with simulators, while ProcTHOR expands AI2-THOR with tens of thousands of procedurally generated
multi-room houses [21]. Holodeck [26] introduces LLM-guided scene generation beyond household environments,
and InternScenes [27] combines real scans, procedural layouts, and designer-created environments to provide diverse
indoor scenes at scale. Despite addressing scene and asset scale, these datasets offer limited support for physics-based
manipulation and are primarily evaluated on navigation tasks. Conversely, GraspGen [28] provides large-scale grasp
annotations for Objaverse assets, but these remain at the asset level and require substantial effort to integrate into
interactive scenes.


                                                                  3
By contrast, MolmoSpaces addresses both scale and task diversity through a ready-to-use ecosystem that unifies
230K scenes from AI2-THOR [18], ProcTHOR [21], and Holodeck [26], and makes them compatible across MuJoCo,
IsaacSim, and ManiSkill. The ecosystem further incorporates 130K object assets from Objaverse [25], with over 48K
objects annotated with grasp data and validated to be pickable and articulable under realistic physics. Together, these
components enable scalable, diverse, and physically grounded evaluation of navigation, manipulation, and mobile
manipulation policies. Comparisons between MolmoSpaces and prior work are summarized in Table 1.

Benchmarks are central to progress in robotics, providing standardized tasks and evaluation protocols for fair comparison,
reproducibility, and diagnosis of failure modes. However, real-world benchmarking remains difficult to scale due to
hardware heterogeneity, differences in sensing and control stacks, and the time and labor required for evaluation.
Recent efforts such as RobotArena [29] partially address these challenges through distributed, crowd-sourced evaluation,
while others like AutoEval [30] leverage success classifiers and reset policies to facilitate near-autonomous real-world
evaluations of specific tasks. However, real-world evaluation alone remains limited in the scale and diversity needed to
robustly assess generalist policies.
Simulation-based benchmarks offer a scalable and reproducible alternative, enabling controlled variation and system-
atic stress testing that are impractical in the real world. A wide range of benchmarks have emerged for manipulation [6, 8]
and navigation [18, 31, 32], becoming standard testbeds for evaluation. RoboVerse [33] unifies several of these bench-
marks under a shared framework. As policies converge on vision–language–action (VLA) models, recent benchmarks
such as LIBERO [6], CALVIN [7], LIBERO-Plus [9], LIBERO-Pro [10], VLABench [34], and RobotArena-Infinity [11]
expand evaluation to include language grounding and generalization. Additional works like the COLOSSEUM [35]
and VLATest [36] evaluate the robustness of generalist policies to changes in lighting, distractor objects, camera poses,
and more. Other efforts, including BEHAVIOR-1K [37], ManiSkill-HAB [38], and EmbodiedBench [39], extend
benchmarks to mobile manipulation, but remain biased toward household environments and limited in scene scale.
Sim-to-real benchmarks focus on providing simulation evaluations that match real-world results. SIMPLER [40] studies
distributional shifts by pairing simulated evaluations with real-robot rollouts, while PolaRiS [12] constructs digital twins
from real-world videos and demonstrates strong sim-to-real correlation across realistic scenes, albeit limited to tabletop
manipulation and partial environment reconstruction. Other works analyze large behavior models across simulated
and real environments, but rely on proprietary evaluation pipelines and closed datasets. Moreover, many sim-to-real
benchmarks require training on simulation data, limiting their ability to assess true zero-shot generalization [12, 37].
In contrast, our benchmark evaluates zero-shot generalist policies across navigation, manipulation, and mobile manipu-
lation tasks using a validation set of over 20K diverse indoor scenes—spanning both household and non-household
environments—and more than 22K interactable rigid and articulated objects. It supports large-scale distributional
analysis under controlled perturbations to scenes, objects, sensors, and language prompts, enabling rigorous assessment
of generalization and failure modes.


3     MolmoSpaces
MolmoSpaces contains:
    1. MolmoSpaces-Scenes: Over 230k diverse indoor environments spanning a wide range of layouts and scene
       types, enabling evaluation across the long tail of real-world spatial configurations.
    2. MolmoSpaces-Objects: More than 130k high-quality rigid and articulated object models with rich semantic and
       physical metadata, supporting assessment of generalization to novel objects.
    3. MolmoSpaces-Grasp: Over 42M annotated grasps across 48k interactive rigid and articulated objects, providing
       ground-truth supervision for grasp success evaluation.
    4. MolmoSpaces-Bench: A benchmark suite comprising object-centric tasks across 8 task types, zero-shot evalua-
       tions with no fine-tuning, and sim-to-real correlation analysis demonstrating that lessons learned in simulation
       transfer to real-world performance.
    5. Simulation Infrastructure: Scalable tooling for task composition, benchmark creation, and reproducible evalua-
       tion.




                                                             4
Figure 2 Examples of diverse scene environments from MolmoSpaces-Scenes-MultiType with the Filament rendering engine. Our
ecosystem contains scenes from art studies, cat cafes, lounges, museums, and many other scenes, all pre-populated with objects to be
manipulated.


                                                                       Dataset Name             Stab.       Lift     Inter.    Artic.
 Dataset          Scene     Object      Obj /     Creation             MSCrafted                100.0      97.5      98.3      99.1
 Name             Count      Set       Scene      Method               MSProc                    99.4      99.7      99.9      97.4
                                                                       MSProcObja                98.4      98.7      99.1      93.7
 MSTwin              1        -          8         Manual              MSMultiType              94.9       99.6      93.7      65.2
 MSCrafted          120     THOR        ∼30      Hand-crafted
 MSProc             12k     THOR        ∼72        Heuristic         Table 3 Scene datasets are all quality tested in the MuJoCo
 MSProcObja        110k     THOR+       ∼60        Heuristic         simulator with high pass rates.
 MSMultiType       110k     THOR+       ∼97       LLM Proc.
                                                                      Dataset Name         MSCraft      MSProc     MSObja     MSMulti

Table 2 MolmoSpaces-Scenes contains five scene datasets with          Stability test (%)     92.5        93.9       95.9       95.2
varying scene types, scales, objects, and creation methods.
                                                                     Table 4 Isaac Sim simulator pass rates.


3.1     MolmoSpaces-Scenes
We provide five scene datasets, summarized in Table 2. The scenes were originally sourced from multiple datasets
in AI2-THOR: MolmoSpaces-Scenes-Crafted, MolmoSpaces-Scenes-MultiType, MolmoSpaces-Scenes-Procedural,
and MolmoSpaces-Scenes-Procedural-Obja. We process and tune these scenes to be physically realistic in MuJoCo,
ManiSkill, and IsaacSim. MolmoSpaces-Scenes-Crafted (MSCrafted) contains 120 hand-crafted single-room scenes
evenly distributed among kitchens, bedrooms, living rooms, and bathrooms, split into 48/48/24 train/validation/test
scenes, with object placement carefully curated to ensure physical stability. MolmoSpaces-Scenes-Procedural (MSProc)
provides 12k procedurally generated residential scenes with 10k/1k/1k train/validation/test splits, where each scene
represents a house with between one and ten rooms with layouts designed for realistic household navigation and
manipulation. MolmoSpaces-Scenes-Procedural-Obja (MSProcObja) extends this with 110k train/validation scenes
containing both THOR and Objaverse objects. MolmoSpaces-Scenes-MultiType (MSMultiType) provides 110k di-
verse scene types generated via LLM-based procedural generation, also with THOR and Objaverse objects. Finally,
MolmoSpaces-Scenes-DigitalTwin (MSTwin) is a high-fidelity manual reconstruction of our real-world kitchen. All
datasets contain both rigid and articulated objects. Some examples of these scenes are shown in Figure 2.
To generate MSMultiType, we extend the diverse scene generation pipline presented in Holodeck [26]. We select and
extend indoor scene types in the SUN database [41], based on the suitability to the available THOR and Objaverse
object taxonomy, and reorganize them into a hierarchy with between five and fifteen concrete scene types for each of ten
generic types. In total, 546 room types (including many scene-specific) and 101 scene types are available for scene
sampling (Fig. 17 left, in the appendix). Each scene specification contains a generic or concrete scene type and between
one and ten rooms of diverse types. We also sample from a subset of 52k persona descriptions from [42] – chosen by
their suitability to produce visual and stylistic differences in objects, materials, or layout constraint selection – and
accentuate some particular style in 90% of the scene specifications, which are finally converted to text prompts for LLM
scene generation. We add a ‘grid’ constraint to the DFS-based object placement optimizer in Holodeck to simplify the


                                                                 5
Figure 3 An example scene rendered across different simulators: MuJoCo, Issac Sim, and ManiSkill. When using MuJoCo, the
scenes can be rendered using either the OpenGL renderer (Classic) or with Filament (Filament).


uniform placement of objects in available free space commonly occurring in non-residential scenes.
In order to enable the wide-spread use of our simulation assets, we also release them converted to the USD format, which
can be natively loaded in IsaacSim. Additionally, we provide both an asset and scene loader for ManiSkill. Figure 3
illustrates the same scene rendered across aforementioned simulators and their respective rendering engines. Finally, we
generate occupancy maps for all scenes to identify collision-free starting poses for robots, ensuring safe initialization for
both manipulation and navigation experiments.
Scene quality testing: For an environment to be suitable for both navigation and manipulation tasks, objects must
remain physically stable, respond appropriately to applied forces, and be accessible for interaction. Specifically, objects
should not drift or randomly move, rigid objects must be pick-upable, articulated objects must allow motion across their
defined ranges, and masses, friction, and other physical parameters should yield realistic dynamics under standard forces.
Ensuring these properties is particularly important when integrating assets not originally designed for physics-based
simulation. Additionally, objects that are originally designed for such simulations often have innately incompatible
parameters by default which also warrant additional tuning for integration.
To systematically enforce these conditions, we implemented four tests addressing different aspects of physical validity:
scene stability, object intersections, rigid object liftability, and articulation of movable objects. First, each scene was
settled by simulating approximately 20 seconds and then saved with the updated, settled poses. Stability tests simulate
the environment for multiple steps after settling and remove any objects that continue to jitter. Intersection tests detect
colliding objects: if a collision occurs between a fixed and a free object, the free object is removed; if the collision is
between two free objects, the smaller one is removed. Lift tests apply upward forces to all free objects and measure their
displacement along the z-axis; objects that cannot be lifted by at least 5 cm and are detected inside another object’s site
are removed. Articulation tests apply forces at joints to open or close articulated objects; if an object cannot be actuated
through at least 70% of its joint range, free objects located within its articulation site or blocking its motion are removed
Across MuJoCo scenes (Table 3), over 95% of environments pass these stability and manipulation checks. The lowest
success rate is observed for articulation tests on the MSMultiType scene dataset (63%). We note that these scenes were
designed to maximize navigability by biasing large object placement to prevent blocking door-to-door navigation while
ensuring many small objects can be accessibly placed for manipulation tasks. Manual inspection confirms that most
failures arise from scene layout rather than limitations of the simulation engine. We additionally evaluated a subset of
scenes in Isaac Sim, observing consistently high pass rates as shown in Table 4, which demonstrates the robustness and
cross-platform validity of our validation pipeline.

3.2    MolmoSpaces-Objects
We provide two object model datasets consisting of 1.6k THOR and 129k Objaverse objects, with samples shown in
Figure 4. These assets populate the generated scenes described in Section 3.1. Table 5 reports the average number of
objects per scene for each dataset. To ensure physical realism, rigid objects were validated by estimating mass and
density against LLM-estimated values, and articulable objects were tuned by manipulating them via teleoperation of
a simulated Franka FR3 robot. Collider meshes were generated using COACD [43], with primitive colliders human
annotated for all THOR assets. For stability, receptacle objects primarily use primitive colliders, while manipulable
objects use convex decomposition except for very small or thin items, where primitives are preferred. Meshes in


                                                             6
                 Dataset           Total     Pickupable     Non-Pick     Articulated     THOR       Objaverse
                 MSCrafted         ∼30       ∼14            ∼7           ∼9              ∼23        –
                 MSProc            ∼72       ∼34            ∼31          ∼7              ∼41        –
                 MSProcObja        ∼105      ∼47            ∼50          ∼7              ∼72        ∼32
                 MSMultiType       ∼150      ∼61            ∼77          ∼12             ∼73        ∼77

Table 5 Average number of objects per scene on each dataset




Figure 4 A random sampling of object types in our ecosystem, with different sizes, shapes, and articulations. These examples are
rendered with Filament.


Objaverse models were further processed and decimated for simulation efficiency [44].
THOR objects span 134 categories, with 22 articulable categories (e.g., doors, refrigerators) annotated with joint types,
axes, positions, and ranges. Objaverse objects, spanning almost 2.8k WordNet [45, 46] synsets, are curated from 625k
models annotated with descriptions, mass estimates, canonical poses, pickable and receptacle properties, synsets, and
scale estimates generated by GPT-4o [47, 48]. A complementary GPT-4.1 [49] annotation identified object counts,
extraneous or missing geometry, texture quality, and receptacle presence in models with parseable annotation. Filtering
provided 129k single-object models that met scale consistency, sufficient texture quality, cross-renderer fidelity, compact
file size, collider quality, and synset coverage as objects to be placed in MSMultiType scenes. Additional filtering
was done for MSProcObja to keep only objects with synsets heuristically mapped to placement-compatible THOR
categories, resulting in 92k objects across 2k synsets. Further details in filtering and curating objects from Objaverse are
described in Appendix A.
Object models are accompanied by extensive physical and semantic metadata, convex colliders, and canonical coordinate
definitions, besides grasps, which are obtained as described below. To support easy integration into robotics simulation
workflows, all object models are provided in formats compatible with MuJoCo, IsaacSim, and ManiSkill.

3.3    MolmoSpaces-Grasp
We introduce a comprehensive grasp dataset, MolmoSpaces-Grasp, consisting of over 42 million grasps that cover
objects in MolmoSpaces scenes. Our dataset provides 6-DoF grasp poses for two types of manipulable objects: rigid
objects, which can be picked and moved as single bodies, and articulable objects, whose constituent parts can move
relative to one another via a revolute or prismatic joint. Our grasp generation process builds on prior work such as


                                                               7
                                  Antipodal Sampling                           Final Grasp Dataset
 Rigid 3D Object Models                                                        (40M+ Grasps)




                                                        Shaking Test


 Articulated 3D Object Models




            Leaf Mesh Extractor                        Articulation Test



Figure 5 Our grasp generation pipeline consists of separate streams for rigid and articulated assets. We generate 42M+ verified
grasps that can be utilized to create scripted interaction policies. Grasps can be used in different simulation environments, with an
Issac example shown on the right.


GraspGen [28], 6-DOF GraspNet [50] and ACRONYM [51], with extensions to support articulable objects through
a new functionality-based evaluation step. We apply this pipeline to 48,111 objects drawn from a curated subset of
Objaverse and custom-designed THOR assets, using separate pipelines for rigid and articulated objects to reflect their
distinct manipulation requirements. Table 8 compares our dataset with recent large-scale grasp datasets.
Grasp generation: Our pipeline (Figure 5) begins with 3D object models, from which we extract mesh colliders for
grasp sampling. Antipodal contact pairs are sampled based on the geometry of the Robotiq 2F-85 gripper and the object.
For rigid objects, sampling is performed across the full mesh surface, whereas for articulated objects, it is restricted to
leaf components corresponding to handles or other functional interaction points. Grasps that result in collisions with
non-leaf geometry are immediately discarded.
From the initial samples, we select up to 1,000 diverse and robust grasps per object. To ensure diversity, sampled grasps
are clustered in the full 6-DoF pose space and tested uniformly across clusters. Grasp robustness is evaluated differently
depending on the object type. For rigid objects, we apply controlled linear and rotational perturbations to the gripper
upon grasping and discard any grasp that fails to maintain contact, leading to object slippage. For articulated objects, we
define a grasp robustness by its actuation feasibility, meaning it can actuate the relevant joint through at least 70% of its
valid range in both directions, while maintaining stable contact.
To evaluate the practical utility of annotated grasps in MolmoSpaces scenes, we perform in-situ tests using a floating
Robotiq 2F-85 gripper. Candidate grasps that collide with scene geometry are discarded, with collision checks performed
at the pre-grasp pose (4 cm offset along the gripper’s negative local z-axis), grasp pose, and along the execution trajectory.
The gripper then executes the pre-grasp and grasp motions, followed by lifting the object or articulating its moving part
along the object’s joint path. Success rates (Fig. 24 in Appendix) are reported only for grasps that pass all collision
checks and complete the intended motion.
Initial evaluations showed that objects placed on surfaces often had few viable, non-colliding grasps. This is because
grasp generation is performed on isolated objects without surrounding geometry and ignores gravity, resulting in high
failure rates due to slippage during in-situ testing. To mitigate this, we updated the pipeline to generate more robust and
stable grasps by biasing contacts toward the center of the fingertips as illustrated in Figure 6 . For small or thin objects,
such as forks and pens, fingertip-edge contacts are preferred.
Remaining failures are largely due to scene- and object-level constraints: for lifting, common issues include objects too
large for the lift pose, confined spaces limiting vertical clearance, collisions along the execution trajectory, and object
slippage through the grasp; for articulated objects, failures occur when the object lifts instead of actuating, collisions
exists along the articulation path, obstacles block articulation, or the gripper misaligns with the handle. These results
underscore the importance of in-situ evaluation for producing grasps that are functional and practically useful given the
way objects contextually exist within the scene.




                                                                           8
                    Figure 6 RobotIQ 2F-85 gripper and preferred grasping locations for sampling grasps


                                          Experiment
                                                                                                              𝜋
   Scenes              Objects              Robots                Tasks            Cameras Policies
Figure 7 Code Structure with modular experiment composition.


3.4    Robots
We provide robots with varying amounts of mobility and complexity, covering the spectrum of widely-used manipulation
platforms. We categorize these platforms as static or mobile, and single-arm or bimanual. To handle all of these
cases, we provide a Franka FR3 arm with three gripper configurations (Franka Hand, RobotIQ 2F-85, and CAP) as
a static manipulator, Rainbow RB-Y1 as a bimanual and holonomic mobile manipulator, and floating CAP [52] and
RobotIQ grippers, unconnected to arms, so without kinematic limits. The Franka FR3 with the RobotIQ 2F-85 gripper
is specifically set up as a DROID [53] system, with corresponding cameras with the correct intrinsics and extrinsics.
The Franka FR3, RobotIQ Gripper, and Rainbow RB-Y1 robot models were sourced from [54].
Robot Control: For manipulators, our framework provides for both absolute and relative joint position commands,
which are tracked internally with a gravity-compensated joint-space stiffness controller. Mobile platforms, such as the
holonomic RB-Y1 base or 6DoF floating CAP, can be controlled via absolute or relative poses.
Kinematics Computation: We provide built-in forward and inverse kinematics solvers for each robot, and the modular
nature of our framework makes it easy to further extend for new robots. Our parallelized inverse-kinematics solver
is written in JAX, and leverages Levenberg-Marquadt optimization with null-space control for posture regularization.
This solver can natively be GPU-accelerated, but even on a CPU can solve batches as large as 256 samples with high
precision in ∼200ms. For the RB-Y1 robot, which is configured for use with the cuRobo[55] motion generator, we
provide forward and inverse kinematics as a wrapper around cuRobo’s functionality.

3.5    Modular experiment composition
MolmoSpaces supports modular experiment composition by flexibly combining scenes, tasks, robots, and camera
configurations, as illustrated in the Figure 7. We provide camera setups for commonly used RealSense, ZED, and GoPro
cameras. Beyond vision inputs—including calibrated multi-view RGB and optional depth cameras with object image
points—the framework exposes rich proprioceptive signals (e.g., joint states, end-effector and base poses), task-state
information (object and articulation states), as well as task annotations, planner signals, and action histories. Together,
these sensors capture the full interaction context.

3.6    Data collection
Two different modes of data collection are possible. Manual data collection is possible using TeleDex [56] iPhone app,
which uses iOS ARKit to stream the phone’s pose. In addition to this, leveraging the pre-computed grasps, it would be
possible for scripted policies to control the robot to solve the defined tasks.


                                                            9
        a) “open the oven"             b) “close the drawer"            c) “pick up the cup"         d) “place the spray in the bowl"




          e) “pull" (door)               f) “find a lamp"           g) “place pencil next to vase"     h) “prepare a simple meal"

Figure 8 Example images of our range of tasks, spanning from manipulation of articulated and non-articulated assets to navigation
and long-horizon tasks, shown together with their associated text instructions. These examples are from the MuJoCo simulator.


4     Benchmark
To enable rigorous and reproducible evaluation of robot policies, we introduce MolmoSpaces-Bench, which spans eight
base tasks across navigation, manipulation, and mobile manipulation. These benchmarks are designed with explicit
diversity requirements across scenes, object categories, and robot configurations, with each trial verified for solvability.

4.1     Tasks
Leveraging the diverse scenes, assets, and robots provided by MolmoSpaces, we introduce a suite of tasks and
corresponding benchmarks designed for comprehensive policy evaluation. We define eight base tasks: navigate-to, pick,
pick-and-place, pick-and-place-next-to, pick-and-place-color, open, close, and open-door. For each of these tasks, we
also provide a well-defined success condition and a dense reward function.
    1. Navigate-to: A policy must search for and navigate to a specified target object. The robot is initialized between 4
       and 20 meters away from the target object, possibly in an entirely different room. The success conditions require
       the object to be visible from the robot’s head camera and closer than 1.5 meters away. We sample the same object
       candidate set as [57].
    2. Pick: Grasp and lift a specified object from its initial location by at least 1cm.
    3. Pick-and-place: Move a target object to be into or onto a target receptacle. To be counted as successful, at least
       50% of the object’s weight must be vertically supported by the receptacle. Additionally, the target receptacle
       cannot have been displaced by more than 10 cm or 45 ° from its initial pose.
    4. Pick-and-place-color: Similar to pick-and-place, with the same initialization and success conditions. However,
       the task is complicated by multiple duplicates of the target receptacle differentiated only by color. This color is
       included in the task prompt, requiring policies to attend to and follow specific task instructions.
    5. Pick-and-place-next-to: Move a target object to be next to a target receptacle. The target receptacle is initialized
       30-50 cm away from the target object, and to be successful, the policy must move the object to be closer than 5
       cm surface-to-surface from the target receptacle. The object must additionally be on the same support surface
       (e.g., table) as the receptacle, which cannot have been displaced by more than 5 cm or 45° from its initial pose.
    6. Open: Open an articulated household fixture such as a drawer, cabinet, microwave, or fridge. Starting fully closed,
       the robot must open the fixture by at least 15%.
    7. Close: Close an articulated household fixture, which is initialized halfway open. To succeed, the policy must
       close the fixture to at most 15% open or 85% closed.
    8. Open-door: Open a hinged door by manipulating its handle or surface. The door starts fully closed, and the
       policy is tasked with opening it by at least 67%.



                                                               10
Navigation     The navigate-to task is evaluated with the Rainbow RB-Y1, which is instructed to locate and navigate
to a given object. Following [57], the robot is initialized 4-20m away from the target object, and success is defined as
being closer than 1.5m to the target object with it clearly visible in the navigation camera. For this task, policies must
explicitly signal task completion, and incorrectly doing so is counted as a failure.

Rigid-body manipulation        Non-articulated manipulation includes the pick, pick-and-place, pick-and-place-color,
and pick-and-place-next-to tasks, which are evaluated with a Franka FR3 robot in the DROID configuration. For
pick, the robot must grasp and lift an object by at least 1cm. For pick-and-place, the robot must move an object into
or on a target receptacle, while pick-and-place-next-to requires the robot to place the object next to the receptacle.
The pick-and-place-color task is a variant of pick-and-place with multiple similar but differently-colored receptacles,
requiring policies to attend and adhere to specific task instructions.

Articulated manipulation       Our three articulated manipulation tasks cover both static and mobile manipulation.The
open and close tasks are static manipulation tasks evaluated with the FR3 in the DROID setup, where the robot must
open or close a variety of articulated household fixtures, including cabinets, drawers, refrigerators, and microwaves, by
at least 15%.The open-door task is a mobile articulated manipulation task, where an RB-Y1 robot must push or pull a
door to be at least 67% open, requiring coordinated mobility and manipulation across many degrees of freedom.
Specifically, we evaluate following models:
   1. PI models (manipulation). We evaluate generalist models from the PI family, namely π0 , π0 -FAST, and π0.5 . As
      these models are trained primarily on real-world data, this setting constitutes a real-to-simulation evaluation. We
      follow the DROID hardware setup for this set of evaluations.
   2. CAP models (manipulation). We evaluate CAP models that are task-specific and available for the following
      tasks: pick, open, and close. The models are conditioned on 3D “contact” points, which are provided by using
      Gemini-Robotics-ER-1.5 [58] at the initial step of the episode. We use the custom gripper design that CAP
      policies are trained with to replace the Robotiq Gripper from the DROID setup.
   3. RING model (navigation). RING is an embodiment-agnostic indoor navigation policy trained entirely in simulation
      using large-scale randomization over robot body geometry and sensor configurations.
   4. DualVLN (navigation). DualVLN is a dual-system VLN foundation model that separates high-level reasoning
      from low-level control: a VLM-based global planner predicts mid-term waypoint goals, with a lightweight
      diffusion-based policy that executes smooth, real-time trajectories conditioned on these goals.

4.2    Benchmark creation
For every task, we provide one or more benchmarks designed for comprehensive policy evaluation. These benchmarks
draw from multiple scene datasets, described in Sec. 3.1, and provide varying levels of difficulty and complexity.
Concretely, each benchmark is defined by an initial scene, robot, and camera configuration, as well as a descriptive
task instruction. To ensure benchmark quality, we perform balancing to maximize diversity of object categories and
instances, as well as scenes. Additionally, each of our provided benchmarks are guaranteed to be solvable with the
provided robot and initial conditions, ensuring task feasibility.
We generate a full set of benchmarks with all combinations of environments and tasks, listed in Table 6. For easier
comparisons, we also include preferred evaluation configurations. For the open and close tasks, we choose the MSCrafted
scenes, as these contain handcrafted kitchens with many cabinets and drawers. For most manipulation tasks, we choose
the MSProcObj variants, as the presence of objaverse assets gives object diversity. For the door-opening task, we use the
MSProc environment, as object diversity is irrelevant. All tasks have 2k samples. We present select benchmark results
in Sec. 5.1.

4.3    Extensions
Controlled variants of benchmarks enable easier testing of hypotheses. For example, to answer the question “Does
a policy perform as well on open vocabulary navigation as on closed vocabulary navigation?", one can evaluate on
MSProc, which uses a closed set of object categories, versus MSMultiType, which supports open vocabulary. In addition
to this, MolmoSpaces also allows for the easy creation of controlled adversarial benchmarks to test specific functionality,


                                                            11
                   Task                            MSCrafted MSProc MSProcObj MSMultiType
                   Open (Franka)                       ✓+e          ✓             ✓               ✓
                   Close (Franka)                      ✓+e          ✓             ✓               ✓
                   Pick (Franka)                        ✓          ✓+e            ✓               ✓
                   Pick & Place (Franka)                ✓          ✓+e            ✓               ✓
                   Pick & Place Next To (Franka)        ✓           ✓             ✓               ✓
                   Door Open (RBY1)                     ✓           ✓             ✓               ✓
                   Pick (RBY1)                          ✓           ✓             ✓               ✓
                   Pick & Place (RBY1)                  ✓           ✓             ✓               ✓
                   Navigation (RBY1)                                              ✓               ✓

Table 6 Availability of manipulation and navigation benchmarks across environments. ✓ indicates the benchmark is available, +e
indicates there is an easy variant of the benchmark, ✓indicates the preferred evaluation environemnt.


such as the ability of a policy to handle varying initial robot configurations (shown in Fig. 12) or the ability to do
manipulation in progressively more cluttered environments.
Additionally, while our provided benchmarks cover a variety of short-horizon tasks, long-horizon evaluation is also
a critically important aspect of benchmarking. To that end, we provide an LLM-based task generation system that
can generate long-horizon tasks with more abstract task descriptions. In this process, shown in Fig. 9, we take an
existing scene and prompt an LLM to generate feasible long-horizon tasks, defined by a high-level task description and
a sequence of base tasks as defined in Sec. 4.1. Unlike the base tasks, the tasks obtained by this sampling procedure can
result in longer horizons, e.g., needing to open a fridge before taking objects out and placing them elsewhere.


                                                                                Parse Output & Convert to MultiTask Reward
                                              position,
                                              bounding box,                    reward = sum(task_definitions[output[i]])
                                              relations,
                                         JSON etc.                                    Prompt "Make a salad"

                                                                  LLM                 Task Pick_Place(Tomato, Bowl),
                                                                                           Open(Refrigerator),
                                               pick,                                       Pick_Place(Lettuce, Bowl),
                                               place,
                                               open,
                                         Tasks close


Figure 9 The LLM-based long-horizon task generation system makes use of text-form scene descriptions to generate new task
descriptions and success condition checks based on predefined atomic checks.



5     Experiments
5.1     Evaluations
We use MolmoSpaces-Bench to evaluate open-source manipulation and navigation policies across the diverse scenes of
MolmoSpaces zero-shot, without task-specific fine-tuning as done in many prior evaluations. We believe this setting is
more practical, as it evaluates models as they are released and intended to be used, rather than their ability to efficiently
fit additional task-specific data. We report the results under the standard settings in in Fig. 10.

5.1.1    Manipulation tasks
We evaluate vision–language–action (VLA) models from the π family [1, 2, 16] (π0 , π0 -FAST, and π0.5 , specifically the
joint position variants that have been fine-tuned on the DROID dataset [12]) as well as utility contact-action models from
CAP [52]. These models make use of different setups as described in Sec. 3.4, and therefore operate under different
sensing and embodiment constraints. In particular, the DROID setup provides the π models with two camera views,


                                                             12
                                 100
        Success Rate (%), mean                                                                                                                                                                           84%
                                  80
                                                                                                                                                                                                  62%
                                  60                                                                            55%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              48%
                                                                                                                                                                                   47%
                                                                                                                                              42%
                                  40                                            34%                                                                     35%
                                                          28%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        21%
                                                    20%                 16%                                                            18%
                                  20         14%
                                                                 9%                                                        9%   10%                                                                                 7%      10%   10%
                                       3%
                                   0
                                                            Pick                                                                 Open                                                       Close                    Pick & Place       Navigation
                                                      CAP Policies                                                                     π Policies                                                                         Other
                                       CAP-EC1         CAP-EC2         CAP-EC3                                   CAP             π-0         π-0 FAST      π-0.5                                        Paligemma Binning         DualVLN   RING


Figure 10 Zero-shot success rates of different baseline policies across five MolmoSpaces benchmark tasks. Showing expected
performance improvement in improved policies. Error bars show 95% Bayesian credible intervals.

                                                           Pick                                                                         Open                                                                               Close
Real-world Performance* (%)




                                                                                 Real-world Performance* (%)




                                                                                                                                                              Real-world Performance* (%)
                                 100                                                                           100                                                                          100

                                  80                                                                            80                                                                          80

                                  60                                                                            60                                                                          60

                                  40                                                                            40                                                                          40

                                  20                               R=0.96 [0.92, 0.98]
                                                                                                                20                              R=0.85 [0.57, 0.99]
                                                                                                                                                                                            20      R=0.97 [0.62, 1.00]
                                                                   ρ=1.00 [0.93, 1.00]                                                          ρ=0.40 [0.20, 1.00]                                 ρ=1.00 [0.20, 1.00]
                                   0                                                                             0                                                                            0
                                       0%         20%   40%     60%    80%                                            0%    20%   40%     60%    80%                                                0%      20%   40%     60%    80%
                                                  Benchmark Performance                                                     Benchmark Performance                                                           Benchmark Performance
                                                      CAP Policies                                                                     π Policies                                                  Other
                                            CAP      CAP-EC1      CAP-EC2                                      CAP-EC3           π-0      π-0 Fast         π-0.5                                       Paligemma Binning


Figure 11 Sim-to-real correlation results for pick, open, and close task. Coefficient of determination (R) and the Spearman rank
correlation coefficient (ρ) are shown.


whereas the floating CAP setup uses a single wrist-mounted camera and has no kinematic constraints. During benchmark
construction, we ensure that all manipulation tasks are feasible under the DROID setup.

5.1.2                                   Navigation Tasks
We select two state-of-the-art prior methods for visual object-goal navigation. RING [59] is an embodiment-agnostic,
transformer-based navigation policy trained entirely in simulation that demonstrates robust generalization across a wide
range of real-world robot platforms. It is trained on semantic navigation tasks where instructions consist of a simple
verb (e.g., “go to", “locate", “find", “search for", “navigate to") paired with an object category. DualVLN [60] is a
dual-system vision–language navigation (VLN) foundation model that integrates high-level reasoning with low-level
action execution. Unlike RING, DualVLN is trained on detailed instructions that specify intermediate steps the robot
must follow, rather than simple semantic goals (see Fig. 4 of [60] for examples). Both policies are evaluated on the
navigate-to benchmark, which comprises 2,000 trajectories across 679 houses and goal objects drawn from 568 synset
categories. This difference in task formulation explains the performance gap between policies (see Fig. 10), as our
benchmark’s semantic navigation format poses a distributional mismatch for DualVLN while aligning with RING’s
training. We adopt semantic navigation because it is more directly compatible with downstream mobile manipulation
tasks.

5.2                                    Sim-to-Real Correlation
Correlation between performance in real and simulated evaluations shows how predictive simulation results are of
real world behavior. We therefore compare the results achieved by policies in our benchmarks to their real-world
performance, which we take from RoboArena [29] and CAP [52]. We evaluate the correlation for the pick, open, and
close tasks individually. Results for are shown in Fig. 11. For the pick task, we observe a strong linear correlation


                                                                                                                                       13
                   50
Success Rate (%)
                   40
                                29% 28%                     29%     28%          27%
                                                25%
                   30 24%                             20%
                   20                                                                                                           40




                                                                                                       Success Rate (%), mean
                   10                                                                                                                             28% 29%                                        29% 31%
                                                                                                                                                                          27% 28%      27% 28%
                                                                                                                                30
                         −0.5   −0.3    0.0     0.3   0.5   0.5     1.0          2.0                                                                                20%
                          Joints Perturbation (rad)           Light Multiplier (x)                                              20                            17%
                                                                                                                                            14%
                                                                                                                                      13%
                         61%
                                 55%                                            Third-Person
Success Rate (%)




                   60                                                           Wrist                                           10


                   40                                        28%                                                                0
                                                      23%                 22%                                                                 π-0                   π-0 Fast                 π-0.5
                                                                                       20%
                   20                                                                                                                         Droid Verb (Sequence Frequency)
                                                                          19%          2%                                            pick→eat (0)    pick (177)   pick→place (1,657)    put (25,985)

                         0.0      3.0                 9.0     0.0         0.5          1.0
                        Point Conditioning Noise (cm) Camera Occlusion Probability
                                                                                                    Figure 13 Prompt sensitivity: π models performance on the
                                                                                                    Pick-MSProc-1k benchmark with varying prompts. Frequent
                                CAP     π-0.5
                                                                                                    DROID prompts perform better.
Figure 12 Robustness analysis under environmental perturba-
tions. Top: Joint noise and lighting. Bottom: Point noise and
camera occlusion.


between our MolmoSpaces-Bench results and the results from 752 RoboArena pick tasks, with Pearson and Spearman
rank correlation coefficients of 0.96 and 0.98, respectively. This underlines MolmoSpaces-Bench’s utility and predictive
power. As in the Pick task, we compute correlations between benchmark success rates and real-world performance
measured on RoboArena and CAP for the open and close tasks. While fewer real-world episodes are available for these
tasks, we observe consistent positive correlations but with bigger error bars.

5.3                       Distributional Evaluations
Machine learning models typically perform best under small distribution shifts between training and evaluation. Given
that the π series models are trained on datasets that include DROID [53], we evaluate how performance degrades as
we move away from this distribution. This evaluation is enabled by the scale of MolmoSpaces, which allows us to
systematically vary environmental and policy factors beyond aggregate success metrics.
To probe language-induced distribution shift, we vary the pick task prompt using verb sequences of increasing frequency
in DROID instructions, as shown in Figure 13. When using phrasing that are more frequent in the DROID dataset, π0
achieves a success rate within 1% of π0.5 , compared to a 14% gap otherwise. With the assumption that the underlying
DROID data distributions used to fine-tune π models are similar, this sensitivity to prompt phrasing suggests that
generalization limitations of earlier π models arise from the language-conditioning component rather than the action
heads. We observe this effect for the pick task in our benchmark and leave validation of its generality in other tasks to
future work.
A similar degradation is observed when perturbing the initial joint positions of the π0.5 policy from the default
configuration used in DROID. As shown in Figure 12, varying the starting joint positions away from this default leads to
a decline in performance. In contrast, varying the lighting intensity has little effect on performance, likely because such
visual distribution shifts are mitigated through image-based data augmentation.
Figure 12 also illustrates the effect of other environmental perturbations on the performance of policies. In particular,
occluding the wrist camera reduces π0.5 success rate to 2%, while occluding the third-person camera only lowers the
performance to 20%, indicating a strong reliance on wrist-mounted visual input. Similarly, CAP’s performance indicates
a strong reliance on a good starting conditioning point. Figure 15 shows that π0.5 and CAP prefer different grasping
approaches, with π0.5 favoring top-down grasps and CAP favoring side grasps. This preference helps explain why π0.5
performs better on objects with top openings, such as mugs and bowls, while CAP performs better than π0.5 on objects
where side grasps are feasible, such as bottles and apples, as shown in Figure 14.
                   * The real-world performance is obtained from RoboArena by filtering for pick tasks and using RoboArena’s partial success criteria.




                                                                                               14
Figure 14 Per-object category success rates for CAP and π policy families on the pick task. Colors are normalized per row within
each table.


5.4    Controlled Policy Comparison
To ensure a fair comparison between policies, we use a Franka FR3 arm setup as a unified embodiment for all
manipulation benchmarks, alongside three RGB-D cameras: one wrist-mounted and two third-person. We allow a fixed
offset in the robot base frame relative to the initial task configuration to accommodate grippers with differing geometries.
This offset must be constant across episodes and should not use any privileged or task-specific information. During
task generation, we filter out benchmark tasks that are not physically achievable under the standard DROID setup. We
acknowledge that this filtering procedure may advantage grippers such as the RobotIQ 2F-85. We also acknowledge that
the choice of end-effector can affect task difficulty, but consider this a part of system design to be evaluated.
Another variable that affects our recorded policies performance is the task horizon, which we set as 300 for the π models,
and 50 for CAP. Figure 16 compares oracle termination with fixed-horizon termination of the π models, showing that
policies sometimes reach a successful state but subsequently undo it before the episode ends. This behavior is also
reflected in Table 7, where on average π0.5 goes through 2.65 grasp-ungrasp transitions before exceeding the reward
threshold in successful episodes, while π0 makes 4.63 such transitions. These results suggest that π models benefit from
sufficient time to retry actions, whereas CAP relies on VLM-based supervision for retries that is not used in our baseline
benchmark experiments.

Table 7 Average number of grasp-ungrasp transitions before task success for π policies on the pick task.

                                             Policy       Mean ± Std      Median
                                             π-0          4.63 ± 5.26        3.0
                                             π-0 Fast     2.02 ± 2.62        1.0
                                             π-0.5        2.65 ± 2.74        1.0




                                                               15
                                                Model
             50                                  CAP




                                                          90° (Side Grasp)
                  0° (Top-Down)
                                                 π-0.5
             40
 Frequency
                                                                                                               35%




                                                                                      Success Rate (%), mean
                                                                                                                                                                             28%
                                                                                                               30%
             30
                                                                                                               25%                                20%
                                                                                                                                                               18%
                                                                                                               20%
             20                                                                                                                  14%
                                                                                                                                         12%
                                                                                                               15%   10%

             10                                                                                                10%
                                                                                                               5%

              0                                                                                                0%
                              0          45              90                                                                π-0              π-0 Fast                 π-0.5
                                                                                                                            Evaluation Type of Pick up Task
                                  Grasping Approach                                             Fixed Episode Length (Can Undo Success)        Oracle Termination (Stops at Success)


Figure 15 Grasp direction histogram of successful grasp of                        Figure 16 Comparison of oracle termination and fixed-horizon
the π0.5 and CAP policies.                                                        termination.


6            Conclusion
We present MolmoSpaces, a comprehensive open ecosystem comprising large-scale simulation environments, diverse
object assets, and extensive grasp datasets. We further introduce MolmoSpaces-Bench, a benchmark suite spanning base
skills and LLM-assisted long-horizon tasks, with controlled difficulty and perturbations that enable detailed analysis
and principled comparison of generalist robot policies. We validate MolmoSpaces-Bench’s utility with thorough
experimentation, demonstrating strong sim-to-real correlation and benchmarking multiple SOTA policies, including
distributional evaluations that reveal subtle policy behavior characteristics. Although simulation remains inherently
imperfect, well-designed simulation benchmarks provide a critical foundation for evaluating robotic policies and guiding
progress toward robust real-world performance. In the future, we plan to support data generation and reinforcement
learning for robot policies at scale, enabling us to further study scaling behaviors for robot foundation models.




                                                                             16
Author Contributions
This project was made possible through the equal contributions of all four co-first authors, in no particular order. Their
individual contributions are as follows:
    • Yejin Kim: Led the project and initially converted all assets and scenes from AI2-THOR to MuJoCo MJCF format;
      contributed to asset quality testings, grasp generation pipeline and evaluations, benchmark creation, and baseline
      evaluations.
    • Wilbert Pumacay: Led the asset conversion and quality testings across MuJoCo, Isaac and ManiSkill simulators.
    • Omar Rayyan: Led distributional benchmark evaluations, the addition of π, CAPs baselines and teleoperation
      data-collection; led the grasp generation pipeline and evaluations; contributed to benchmark creation.
    • Max Argus: Led the benchmark creation and baseline evaluations.
All other contributors are also deeply appreciated for their effort, which is critical to the success of the MolmoSpaces
project. As not all of these can be captured, we indicate their primary contributing role in MolmoSpaces:
    • For assets conversion and physical parameter tunings: Yejin Kim, Wilbert Pumacay, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt,
      Jordi Salvador, and Shuo Liu.
    • For grasp generation and evalautions: Omar Rayyan, and Yejin Kim.
    • For benchmark creation and baseline evaluation: Max Argus, Omar Rayyan, Yejin Kim, Arjun Guru, Maya Guru,
      Abhay Deshpande, Rose Hendrix, Snehal Jauhri, Shuo Liu, Ainaz Eftekhar, Ying-Chun Lee, and Piper Wolters.
      Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah advised the zero-shot and distributional evaluations.
    • For multi-simulator support: Wilbert Pumacay, Alvaro Herrasti, and Donovan Clay
    • For paper writing and figures: Yejin Kim, Max Argus, Wilbert Pumacay, Omar Rayyan, Winson Han, Eli
      VanderBilt, Abhay Deshpande, Rose Hendrix, Maya Guru, Arjun Guru, Jordi Salvador, Jiafei Duan, Nur
      Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, and Ranjay Krishna.
    • For project management: Karen Farley.
    • For research advisory: Ranjay Krishna, Dieter Fox, and Ali Farhadi.
    • Project PI: Ranjay Krishna


Acknowledgment
This work would not be possible without the support of our colleagues at Ai2:
    • We thank Rachel Ratner and Karen Goodfellow for the creation and the support of robot demo webpage for
      MolmoSpaces.
    • We thank David Albright, Crystal Nam, Kristin Cha, Sophie Lebrecht, Taira Anderson, Kyle Wiggers, Kelsey
      MacMillan, Katie Morigi, and Megan Bartot for project management, support to robot room and publicity of
      MolmoSpaces
    • We thank Yoganand Chandrasekhar, Johann Dahm, Fangzhou Hu, and Caroline Wu for their work on the Ai2
      cluster.




                                                           17
References
 [1] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol
     Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj
     Nair, Karl Pertsch, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, James Tanner, Quan Vuong, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, and Ury Zhilinsky. π0 : A
     vision-language-action flow model for general robot control, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.24164.
 [2] Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael
     Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Manuel Y. Galliker, Dibya Ghosh, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon
     Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Devin LeBlanc, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl
     Pertsch, Allen Z. Ren, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Laura Smith, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Kyle Stachowicz, James Tanner, Quan
     Vuong, Homer Walke, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Lili Yu, and Ury Zhilinsky. π0.5 : a vision-language-action model with
     open-world generalization, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.16054.
 [3] Gemini Robotics Team, Saminda Abeyruwan, Joshua Ainslie, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas, Travis
     Armstrong, Ashwin Balakrishna, Robert Baruch, Maria Bauza, Michiel Blokzijl, et al. Gemini robotics: Bringing ai into the
     physical world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20020, 2025.
 [4] Johan Bjorck, Fernando Castañeda, Nikita Cherniadev, Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi Fan, Yu Fang, Dieter Fox, Fengyuan Hu,
     Spencer Huang, et al. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14734,
     2025.
 [5] Martin Sedlacek, Pavlo Yefanov, Georgy Ponimatkin, Jai Bardhan, Simon Pilc, Mederic Fourmy, Evangelos Kazakos, Cees GM
     Snoek, Josef Sivic, and Vladimir Petrik. Realm: A real-to-sim validated benchmark for generalization in robotic manipulation.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.19562, 2025.
 [6] Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. Libero: Benchmarking knowledge
     transfer for lifelong robot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:44776–44791, 2023.
 [7] Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, Erick Rosete-Beas, and Wolfram Burgard. Calvin: A benchmark for language-conditioned policy
     learning for long-horizon robot manipulation tasks, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.03227.
 [8] Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and Andrew J. Davison. Rlbench: The robot learning benchmark & learning
     environment, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.12271.
 [9] Senyu Fei, Siyin Wang, Junhao Shi, Zihao Dai, Jikun Cai, Pengfang Qian, Li Ji, Xinzhe He, Shiduo Zhang, Zhaoye Fei, Jinlan
     Fu, Jingjing Gong, and Xipeng Qiu. Libero-plus: In-depth robustness analysis of vision-language-action models. CoRR,
     abs/2510.13626, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2510.13626. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2510.13626.
[10] Xueyang Zhou, Yangming Xu, Guiyao Tie, Yongchao Chen, Guowen Zhang, Duanfeng Chu, Pan Zhou, and Lichao Sun.
     Libero-pro: Towards robust and fair evaluation of vision-language-action models beyond memorization, 2025. URL https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2510.03827.
[11] Anonymous. Robotarena infinity: Unlimited robot benchmarking via real-to-sim translation. In The Fourteenth International
     Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=OutljIofvS.
[12] Arhan Jain, Mingtong Zhang, Kanav Arora, William Chen, Marcel Torne, Muhammad Zubair Irshad, Sergey Zakharov, Yue
     Wang, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Wei Ma, Dhruv Shah, Abhishek Gupta, and Karl Pertsch. Polaris: Scalable real-to-sim
     evaluations for generalist robot policies, 2025.
[13] Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. 2012 IEEE/RSJ International
     Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages 5026–5033, 2012.
[14] NVIDIA. Isaac Sim, 2026. URL https://github.com/isaac-sim/IsaacSim.
[15] Tongzhou Mu, Z. Ling, Fanbo Xiang, Derek Yang, Xuanlin Li, Stone Tao, Zhiao Huang, Zhiwei Jia, and Hao Su. Maniskill:
     Generalizable manipulation skill benchmark with large-scale demonstrations. In NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks, 2021.
[16] Karl Pertsch, Kyle Stachowicz, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Suraj Nair, Quan Vuong, Oier Mees, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
     Levine. Fast: Efficient action tokenization for vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09747, 2025.
[17] Chenghao Yin, Da Huang, Di Yang, Jichao Wang, Nanshu Zhao, Chen Xu, Wenjun Sun, Linjie Hou, Zhijun Li, Junhui Wu,
     Zhaobo Liu, Zhenfei Xiao, Shenglan Zhang, Lei Bao, Rui Feng, Zhenquan Pang, Jiayu Li, Qian Wang, and Maoqing Yao.
     Genie sim 3.0 : A high-fidelity comprehensive simulation platform for humanoid robot, 2026.
[18] Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Daniel Gordon, Yuke Zhu, Abhinav Gupta, and Ali Farhadi. AI2-THOR: an interactive 3d
     environment for visual AI. CoRR, abs/1712.05474, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.05474.


                                                               18
[19] Manolis Savva, Abhishek Kadian, Oleksandr Maksymets, Yili Zhao, Erik Wijmans, Bhavana Jain, Julian Straub, Jia Liu, Vladlen
     Koltun, Jitendra Malik, et al. Habitat: A platform for embodied ai research. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
     conference on computer vision, pages 9339–9347, 2019.
[20] Andrew Szot, Alex Clegg, Eric Undersander, Erik Wijmans, Yili Zhao, John Turner, Noah Maestre, Mustafa Mukadam,
     Devendra Chaplot, Oleksandr Maksymets, Aaron Gokaslan, Vladimir Vondrus, Sameer Dharur, Franziska Meier, Wojciech
     Galuba, Angel Chang, Zsolt Kira, Vladlen Koltun, Jitendra Malik, Manolis Savva, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat 2.0: Training
     home assistants to rearrange their habitat, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.14405.
[21] Matt Deitke, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Luca Weihs, Kiana Ehsani, Jordi Salvador, Winson Han, Eric Kolve, Anirud-
     dha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Procthor: Large-scale embodied AI using procedural generation. In Sanmi
     Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, editors, Advances in Neural Information Pro-
     cessing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans,
     LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
     27c546ab1e4f1d7d638e6a8dfbad9a07-Abstract-Conference.html.
[22] Soroush Nasiriany, Abhiram Maddukuri, Lance Zhang, Adeet Parikh, Aaron Lo, Abhishek Joshi, Ajay Mandlekar, and Yuke
     Zhu. Robocasa: Large-scale simulation of everyday tasks for generalist robots. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2024.
[23] Anonymous. Robocasa365: A large-scale simulation framework for training and benchmarking generalist robots. In The Four-
     teenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=tQJYKwc3n4.
[24] Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhiram Maddukuri, Abhishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Pooley,
     Agrim Gupta, Ajay Mandlekar, Ajinkya Jain, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models: Open
     x-embodiment collaboration 0. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 6892–6903.
     IEEE, 2024.
[25] Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani,
     Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A universe of annotated 3d objects. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
     Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2023, Vancouver, BC, Canada, June 17-24, 2023, pages 13142–13153. IEEE, 2023. doi:
     10.1109/CVPR52729.2023.01263. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52729.2023.01263.
[26] Yue Yang, Fan-Yun Sun, Luca Weihs, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Winson Han, Jiajun Wu, Nick Haber, Ranjay Krishna,
     Lingjie Liu, Chris Callison-Burch, Mark Yatskar, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Christopher Clark. Holodeck: Language guided
     generation of 3d embodied AI environments. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR
     2024, Seattle, WA, USA, June 16-22, 2024, pages 16277–16287. IEEE, 2024. doi: 10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.01536. URL
     https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.01536.
[27] Weipeng Zhong, Peizhou Cao, Yichen Jin, Li Luo, Wenzhe Cai, Jingli Lin, Hanqing Wang, Zhaoyang Lyu, Tai Wang, Bo Dai,
     Xudong Xu, and Jiangmiao Pang. Internscenes: A large-scale simulatable indoor scene dataset with realistic layouts, 2025.
     URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.10813.
[28] Adithyavairavan Murali, Balakumar Sundaralingam, Yu-Wei Chao, Wentao Yuan, Jun Yamada, Mark T. Carlson, Fabio Ramos,
     Stanley T. Birchfield, Dieter Fox, and Clemens Eppner. Graspgen: A diffusion-based framework for 6-dof grasping with
     on-generator training. ArXiv, abs/2507.13097, 2025.
[29] Pranav Atreya, Karl Pertsch, Tony Lee, Moo Jin Kim, Arhan Jain, Artur Kuramshin, Clemens Eppner, Cyrus Neary, Edward Hu,
     Fabio Ramos, Jonathan Tremblay, Kanav Arora, Kirsty Ellis, Luca Macesanu, Matthew Leonard, Meedeum Cho, Ozgur Aslan,
     Shivin Dass, Jie Wang, Xingfang Yuan, Xuning Yang, Abhishek Gupta, Dinesh Jayaraman, Glen Berseth, Kostas Daniilidis,
     Roberto Martin Martin, Youngwoon Lee, Percy Liang, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Roboarena: Distributed real-world
     evaluation of generalist robot policies. ArXiv, abs/2506.18123, 2025.
[30] Zhiyuan Zhou, Pranav Atreya, You Liang Tan, Karl Pertsch, and Sergey Levine. Autoeval: Autonomous evaluation of generalist
     robot manipulation policies in the real world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.24278, 2025.
[31] Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter
     Fox. Alfred: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions for everyday tasks, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
     1912.01734.
[32] Karmesh Yadav, Jacob Krantz, Ram Ramrakhya, Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, Jimmy Yang, Austin Wang, John Turner,
     Aaron Gokaslan, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Roozbeh Mootaghi, Oleksandr Maksymets, Angel X Chang, Manolis Savva, Alexander
     Clegg, Devendra Singh Chaplot, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat challenge 2023. https://aihabitat.org/challenge/2023/,
     2023.
[33] Haoran Geng, Feishi Wang, Songlin Wei, Yuyang Li, Bangjun Wang, Boshi An, Charlie Tianyue Cheng, Haozhe Lou, Peihao Li,
     Yen-Jen Wang, Yutong Liang, Dylan Goetting, Chaoyi Xu, Haozhe Chen, Yuxi Qian, Yiran Geng, Jiageng Mao, Weikang Wan,


                                                              19
     Mingtong Zhang, Jiangran Lyu, Siheng Zhao, Jiazhao Zhang, Jialiang Zhang, Chengyang Zhao, Haoran Lu, Yufei Ding, Ran
     Gong, Yuran Wang, Yuxuan Kuang, Ruihai Wu, Baoxiong Jia, Carlo Sferrazza, Hao Dong, Siyuan Huang, Yue Wang, Jitendra
     Malik, and Pieter Abbeel. Roboverse: Towards a unified platform, dataset and benchmark for scalable and generalizable robot
     learning. ArXiv, abs/2504.18904, 2025.
[34] Shiduo Zhang, Zhe Xu, Peiju Liu, Xiaopeng Yu, Yuan Li, Qinghui Gao, Zhaoye Fei, Zhangyue Yin, Zuxuan Wu, Yu-Gang
     Jiang, and Xipeng Qiu. Vlabench: A large-scale benchmark for language-conditioned robotics manipulation with long-horizon
     reasoning tasks. CoRR, abs/2412.18194, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2412.18194. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
     2412.18194.
[35] Wilbert Pumacay, Ishika Singh, Jiafei Duan, Ranjay Krishna, Jesse Thomason, and Dieter Fox. The colosseum: A benchmark
     for evaluating generalization for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08191, 2024.
[36] Zhijie Wang, Zhehua Zhou, Jiayang Song, Yuheng Huang, Zhan Shu, and Lei Ma. Vlatest: Testing and evaluating vision-
     language-action models for robotic manipulation. Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., 2(FSE), jul 2025. doi: 10.1145/3729343. URL
     https://doi.org/10.1145/3729343.
[37] Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gokmen, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Martín-Martín, Chen Wang, Gabrael
     Levine, Michael Lingelbach, Jiankai Sun, Mona Anvari, Minjune Hwang, Manasi Sharma, Arman Aydin, Dhruva Bansal,
     Samuel Hunter, Kyu-Young Kim, Alan Lou, Caleb R Matthews, Ivan Villa-Renteria, Jerry Huayang Tang, Claire Tang, Fei
     Xia, Silvio Savarese, Hyowon Gweon, Karen Liu, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. BEHAVIOR-1k: A benchmark for embodied
     AI with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic simulation. In 6th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2022. URL
     https://openreview.net/forum?id=_8DoIe8G3t.
[38] Arth Shukla, Stone Tao, and Hao Su. Maniskill-hab: A benchmark for low-level manipulation in home rearrangement tasks.
     ArXiv, abs/2412.13211, 2024.
[39] Rui Yang, Hanyang Chen, Junyu Zhang, Mark Zhao, Cheng Qian, Kangrui Wang, Qineng Wang, Teja Venkat Koripella,
     Marziyeh Movahedi, Manling Li, Heng Ji, Huan Zhang, and Tong Zhang. Embodiedbench: Comprehensive benchmarking
     multi-modal large language models for vision-driven embodied agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.09560.
[40] Xuanlin Li, Kyle Hsu, Jiayuan Gu, Karl Pertsch, Oier Mees, Homer Rich Walke, Chuyuan Fu, Ishikaa Lunawat, Isabel Sieh,
     Sean Kirmani, Sergey Levine, Jiajun Wu, Chelsea Finn, Hao Su, Quan Vuong, and Ted Xiao. Evaluating real-world robot
     manipulation policies in simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.05941, 2024.
[41] Jianxiong Xiao, James Hays, Krista A. Ehinger, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. SUN database: Large-scale scene recognition
     from abbey to zoo. In The Twenty-Third IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2010, San
     Francisco, CA, USA, 13-18 June 2010, pages 3485–3492. IEEE Computer Society, 2010. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2010.5539970.
     URL https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2010.5539970.
[42] Tao Ge, Xin Chan, Xiaoyang Wang, Dian Yu, Haitao Mi, and Dong Yu. Scaling synthetic data creation with 1,000,000,000
     personas. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.20094, 2024.
[43] Xinyue Wei, Minghua Liu, Zhan Ling, and Hao Su. Approximate convex decomposition for 3d meshes with collision-aware
     concavity and tree search. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–18, 2022.
[44] The Allen Institue for AI. objathor, 2024. URL https://github.com/allenai/objathor. GitHub repository.
[45] John P. McCrae, Alexandre Rademaker, Francis Bond, Ewa Rudnicka, and Christiane Fellbaum. English wordnet 2019 - an
     open-source wordnet for english. In Piek Vossen and Christiane Fellbaum, editors, Proceedings of the 10th Global Wordnet
     Conference, GWC 2019, Wroclaw, Poland, July 23-27, 2019, pages 245–252. Global Wordnet Association, 2019. URL
     https://aclanthology.org/2019.gwc-1.31/.
[46] John P. McCrae and Alexandre Rademaker and Ewa Rudnicka and Bernard Bou and Daiki Nomura and David Cillessen and
     Ciara O’Loughlin and Cathal McGovern and Francis Bond and Eric Kafe and Michael Wayne Goodman and Merrick Choo Yeu
     Herng and Enejda Nasaj. Open English Wordnet, 2022. URL https://github.com/globalwordnet/english-wordnet/
     releases/tag/2022-edition. GitHub repository.
[47] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko
     Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[48] Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan
     Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. GPT-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276, 2024.
[49] OpenAI. GPT-4.1, 2024. URL https://platform.openai.com/. Proprietary large language model accessed via the OpenAI
     API; no public system card available.



                                                              20
[50] Arsalan Mousavian, Clemens Eppner, and Dieter Fox. 6-dof graspnet: Variational grasp generation for object manipulation. In
     International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.
[51] Clemens Eppner, Arsalan Mousavian, and Dieter Fox. Acronym: A large-scale grasp dataset based on simulation. 2021 IEEE
     International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 6222–6227, 2020.
[52] Zichen Jeff Cui, Omar Rayyan, Haritheja Etukuru, Bowen Tan, Zavier Andrianarivo, Zicheng Teng, Yihang Zhou, Krish Mehta,
     Nicholas Wojno, Kevin Yuanbo Wu, Manan H Anjaria, Ziyuan Wu, Manrong Mao, Guangxun Zhang, Binit Shah, Yejin Kim,
     Soumith Chintala, Lerrel Pinto, and Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah. Contact-anchored policies: Contact conditioning creates
     strong robot utility models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.09017, 2026.
[53] Alexander Khazatsky, Karl Pertsch, Suraj Nair, Ashwin Balakrishna, Sudeep Dasari, Siddharth Karamcheti, Soroush Nasiriany,
     Mohan Kumar Srirama, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Kirsty Ellis, Peter David Fagan, Joey Hejna, Masha Itkina, Marion Lepert,
     Yecheng Jason Ma, Patrick Tree Miller, Jimmy Wu, Suneel Belkhale, Shivin Dass, Huy Ha, Arhan Jain, Abraham Lee,
     Youngwoon Lee, Marius Memmel, Sungjae Park, Ilija Radosavovic, Kaiyuan Wang, Albert Zhan, Kevin Black, Cheng Chi,
     Kyle Beltran Hatch, Shan Lin, Jingpei Lu, Jean Mercat, Abdul Rehman, Pannag R Sanketi, Archit Sharma, Cody Simpson,
     Quan Vuong, Homer Rich Walke, Blake Wulfe, Ted Xiao, Jonathan Heewon Yang, Arefeh Yavary, Tony Z. Zhao, Christopher
     Agia, Rohan Baijal, Mateo Guaman Castro, Daphne Chen, Qiuyu Chen, Trinity Chung, Jaimyn Drake, Ethan Paul Foster,
     Jensen Gao, Vitor Guizilini, David Antonio Herrera, Minho Heo, Kyle Hsu, Jiaheng Hu, Muhammad Zubair Irshad, Donovon
     Jackson, Charlotte Le, Yunshuang Li, Kevin Lin, Roy Lin, Zehan Ma, Abhiram Maddukuri, Suvir Mirchandani, Daniel Morton,
     Tony Nguyen, Abigail O’Neill, Rosario Scalise, Derick Seale, Victor Son, Stephen Tian, Emi Tran, Andrew E. Wang, Yilin Wu,
     Annie Xie, Jingyun Yang, Patrick Yin, Yunchu Zhang, Osbert Bastani, Glen Berseth, Jeannette Bohg, Ken Goldberg, Abhinav
     Gupta, Abhishek Gupta, Dinesh Jayaraman, Joseph J Lim, Jitendra Malik, Roberto Martín-Martín, Subramanian Ramamoorthy,
     Dorsa Sadigh, Shuran Song, Jiajun Wu, Michael C. Yip, Yuke Zhu, Thomas Kollar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Droid: A
     large-scale in-the-wild robot manipulation dataset, 2024.
[54] Kevin Zakka, Yuval Tassa, and MuJoCo Menagerie Contributors. MuJoCo Menagerie: A collection of high-quality simulation
     models for MuJoCo, 2022. URL http://github.com/google-deepmind/mujoco_menagerie.
[55] Balakumar Sundaralingam, Siva Kumar Sastry Hari, Adam Fishman, Caelan Reed Garrett, Karl Van Wyk, Valts Blukis,
     Alexander Millane, Helen Oleynikova, Ankur Handa, Fabio Tozeto Ramos, Nathan D. Ratliff, and Dieter Fox. Curobo:
     Parallelized collision-free robot motion generation. 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
     pages 8112–8119, 2023.
[56] Omar Rayyan, Maximilian Gilles, and Yuchen Cui. Teledex: Accessible dexterous teleoperation, 2026. URL https:
     //github.com/omarrayyann/teledex.
[57] Kiana Ehsani, Tanmay Gupta, Rose Hendrix, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Kuo-Hao Zeng, Kunal Pratap Singh, Yejin Kim,
     Winson Han, Alvaro Herrasti, Ranjay Krishna, Dustin Schwenk, Eli VanderBilt, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Spoc: Imitating
     shortest paths in simulation enables effective navigation and manipulation in the real world. 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on
     Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 16238–16250, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
     CorpusID:271769346.
[58] Gemini Team, Petko Georgiev, Ving Ian Lei, Ryan Burnell, Libin Bai, Anmol Gulati, Garrett Tanzer, Damien Vincent, Zhufeng
     Pan, Shibo Wang, et al. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.
[59] Ainaz Eftekhar, Luca Weihs, Rose Hendrix, Ege Caglar, Jordi Salvador, Alvaro Herrasti, Winson Han, Eli VanderBil, Aniruddha
     Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi, Ranjay Krishna, Kiana Ehsani, and Kuo-Hao Zeng. The one ring: a robotic indoor navigation generalist.
     ArXiv, abs/2412.14401, 2024.
[60] Meng Wei, Chenyang Wan, Jiaqi Peng, Xiqian Yu, Yuqiang Yang, Delin Feng, Wenzhe Cai, Chenming Zhu, Tai Wang, Jiangmiao
     Pang, and Xihui Liu. Ground slow, move fast: A dual-system foundation model for generalizable vision-and-language navigation.
     ArXiv, abs/2512.08186, 2025. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:283711459.
[61] Chendi Lin, Heshan Liu, Qunshu Lin, Zachary Bright, Shitao Tang, Yihui He, Minghao Liu, Ling Zhu, and Cindy Le.
     Objaverse++: Curated 3D Object Dataset with Quality Annotations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
     on Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops, pages 6813–6822, October 2025.
[62] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell,
     Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language
     supervision. In ICML, 2021.
[63] Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade Gordon, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori, Achal Dave, Vaishaal




                                                               21
     Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Openclip, July 2021.
     URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5143773.
[64] Mehdi Cherti, Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Cade Gordon, Christoph Schuhmann,
     Ludwig Schmidt, and Jenia Jitsev. Reproducible scaling laws for contrastive language-image learning. In CVPR, 2023.




                                                          22
Appendix
A     Object Model Dataset Details




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      procedure room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      reception area


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nurse station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       waiting area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 post-an ster




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     hallway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  staff adminroom




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                corridor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  treatment




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           restroom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   adoche
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    animalinfu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     consultat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      anim




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      staff office ion




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t exam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       storageion room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       utility room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ptiomot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         petqua
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         esthiliza


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            alplay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n cou
                                                                                                                                                                                                  privat
                                                                                                                                                                                                   anima
                                                                                                                                                                                                    medic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               examroom room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               esiation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sionnse
                                                                                                                                                                                                      phlebal recor




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                room
                                                                                                                                                                                                      groom
                                                                                                                                                                                                      medi fami




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                istrat
                                                                                                                                                                                                       immu
                                                                                                                                                                                                        anim




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 heracare
                                                                                                                                                                                                        triageingeling
                                                                                                                                                                                                         pano




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rantroom




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rock.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                         e couns
                                                                                                                                                                                                         denta
                                                                                                                                                                                                         child


                                                                                                                                                                                                          isolat
                                                                                                                                                                                                           phle




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          room er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       area ry
                                                                                                                                                                                                            petimag

                                                                                                                                                                                                            l asses
                                                                                                                                                                                                            fami




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pantter
                                                                                                                                                                                                             diag
                                                                                                                                                                                                             equi
                                                                                                                                                                                                              catio




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e earea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          theat
                                                                                                                                                                                                              pre-o

                                                                                                                                                                                                               otom room
                                                                                                                                                                                                               pare
                                                                                                                                                                                                               pet obse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                psyc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                alnizat




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                anim

                                                                                                                                                                                                                lacta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                scrub
                                                                                                                                                                                                                surge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rami
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  vacc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nthea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lab


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   dent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   boto




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   bathi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   x-raytion




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    obse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    proc



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    treat



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ionsmen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lintak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lynost




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    room




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       nook
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     janitinati




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ryaroom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rou




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     office
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      pme




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      py room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ine room u)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       x-ray




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      oom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      oom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       coun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mee




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ityroom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pet




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ntpatie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        lycons




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               global_positioning_system.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               personal_digital_assistant.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        holo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mino




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         roomroom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sam




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ingryroom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          p room




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t room




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 point-and-shoot_camera.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y ds


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ling (pac




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 videocassette_recorder.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           albiop

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cprep




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pyroom




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              electromechanical_device.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 stora
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                home
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ion room




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 motion-picture_camera.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           althera
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            my
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             relax

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             p isola




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   computer_accessory.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rking
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                room




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nookroom




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    television_antenna.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    personal_computer.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    optical_instrument.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              edur




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    portable_computer.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     radio-phonograph.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mythical_m n.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    push-button_radio.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tatio




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     recording_system.n.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                entertainment_center.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rvati




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     flashlight_battery.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              room

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              room




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cassette_recorder.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              alcov
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ngroom




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ption
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              cons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              icnt mag
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              imag
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ment




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     digital_voltmeter.n.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         onitor.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              kitch




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       memory_device.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       removable_disk.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               wait




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       microprocessor.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       hand_calculator.n.01


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    electrical_device.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      network_bridge.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         roo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                age

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               leep




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  desktop_computer.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cassette_deck.n.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  cellular_telephone.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                feed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        skull.n.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cassette_tape.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        digital_display.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          llroom




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         minicomputer.n.01



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     electrical_cable.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        toggle_switch.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        eyplayr




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       external_drive.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            kfast
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            akid's




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       optical_device.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 quie




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     audio_amplifier.n.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 thera




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   